Reviews
Prodromal Parkinson disease
subtypes — key to understanding
heterogeneity
Daniela Berg 1 ✉, Per Borghammer2,3, Seyed- Mohammad Fereshtehnejad4,5,6,
Sebastian Heinzel1, Jacob Horsager2, Eva Schaeffer1 and Ronald B. Postuma4,7,8
Abstract | In Parkinson disease (PD), pathological processes and neurodegeneration begin long
before the cardinal motor symptoms develop and enable clinical diagnosis. In this prodromal
phase, risk and prodromal markers can be used to identify individuals who are likely to develop
PD, as in the recently updated International Parkinson and Movement Disorders Society research
criteria for prodromal PD. However, increasing evidence suggests that clinical and prodromal
PD are heterogeneous, and can be classified into subtypes with different clinical manifestations,
pathomechanisms and patterns of spatial and temporal progression in the CNS and PNS.
Genetic, pathological and imaging markers, as well as motor and non-m otor symptoms, might
define prodromal subtypes of PD. Moreover, concomitant pathology or other factors, including
amyloid-β and tau pathology, age and environmental factors, can cause variability in prodromal
PD. Patients with REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) exhibit distinct patterns of α- synuclein
pathology propagation and might indicate a body-f irst subtype rather than a brain-f irst subtype.
Identification of prodromal PD subtypes and a full understanding of variability at this stage
of the disease is crucial for early and accurate diagnosis and for targeting of neuroprotective
interventions to ensure efficacy.
Idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) has many emerging compelling evidence indicate that the prodromal phase
facets of temporal and spatial progression within the precedes clinical diagnosis of PD by 10–20 years4–7. Fully
CNS and PNS. On the basis of pathological findings manifest bradykinesia with rest tremor and/or rigidity8
and clinical observations of a slowly progressing neuro­ define the transition to the clinical motor phase of PD,
degenerative process, several phases of PD have been according to International Parkinson and Movement
defined1. Before the onset of neurodegeneration, there is Disorder Society (MDS) criteria. Pathologically, this
a risk phase to which genetic and environmental factors phase is characterized by nigrostriatal synucleinopathy
contribute and in which substantia nigra hyperecho­ and advanced neurodegeneration.
genicity can be observed2. The subsequent preclinical Within this broad characterization of PD phases,
phase is characterized by the initiation of progressive the onset and progression of motor and non­ motor
neurodegenerative pathology before any clinical symp­ symptoms can differ enormously between individuals,
toms or signs are evident. No markers have yet been not only in the clinical phase but also in the prodromal
established to reliably identify individuals at this stage phase9. Some features, such as RBD, early cognitive defi­
of the disease. cits, autonomic dysfunction and genetic risk factors, are
The later prodromal phase is defined by the associated with faster progression10,11 and a shorter life
emergence of observable signs or symptoms of expectancy12,13. In addition, several biological processes
neurodegeneration3. Markers of the prodromal phase that are inherent to normal ageing, such as genomic
include REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD), olfactory instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations,
loss, autonomic dysfunction, depression (with or with­ loss of proteostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellu­
out comorbid anxiety), mild motor signs, and patholog­ lar senescence, deregulated nutrient sensing, stem cell
ical imaging markers of the presynaptic dopaminergic exhaustion and altered intercellular communication,
✉e- mail: daniela.berg@
system and the cardiac sympathetic system. These mark­ are also likely to be relevant to the progression of PD14.
uksh.de
ers have predictive value for clinical PD, although The initiation and progression of PD pathology can also
https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41582-021-00486-9 their specificity varies considerably. Several lines of be heterogeneous between patients, and the extent and
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 349
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
Prodromal PD — definition and diagnosis
Key points
By the time PD can be diagnosed on the basis of its
• Heterogeneity of Parkinson disease (PD) starts in the prodromal phase. cardinal motor symptoms, the neurodegeneration —
• Pathological spread, imaging markers and the onset and progression of motor and not only in the substantia nigra pars compacta but
non-m otor symptoms are variable in prodromal PD. more widely — has been advancing for many years23,24.
• The variability in clinical phenotype suggests that subtypes of prodromal PD can be Evidence from prospective studies not only continues
defined. to confirm the concept of prodromal PD but has ena­
• Possible subtypes of prodromal PD are Rem sleep behaviour disorder subtypes, bled the development of PD prediction models25–27. Risk
brain-f irst and body-f irst subtypes, genetic subtypes and biological subtypes. markers, including genetic factors28–30, environmental
• variability in prodromal PD must result from different pathophysiological mechanisms; and lifestyle factors and concomitant diseases31, have
defining prodromal subtypes is the first step to identifying the biological difference. consistently been associated with an increased risk of
PD. In addition, biomarkers such as low plasma levels
distribution of pathology at the prodromal to clinical of urate and hyperechogenicity of the substantia nigra
stage can vary. Furthermore, different organs15,16, various (when performed by an experienced investigator, as
cellular and systemic processes, biofluid­ borne patho­ accuracy depends on experience)2 can be combined
gens and risk factors can be involved in the aetiology and with other markers to help identify high­ risk states26,32.
spatial progression of PD17. Prodromal markers in the MDS research criteria
The borders of any complex degenerative disease for prodromal PD include subtle motor signs11,33, a diverse
can never be defined perfectly, and this is particu­ list of non­ motor symptoms5,7,25,26 and pathological
larly challenging for PD. If a conceptual framework is findings upon dopaminergic functional imaging34. For
applied in which a disease has established aetiologies, some markers, a clear distinction between their status
syndromes are organized collections of symptoms with as a risk marker or prodromal marker cannot always be
no established aetiology, pathology is a marker of a dis­ made. Moreover, some are risk markers and prodromal
ease and the pathophysiology and aetiology relate to the markers at different times. For instance, depression can
cause, the position of PD is unclear. Although PD has be a PD risk marker in early life but can also indicate
no defined, unified pathophysiology, much is known neurodegeneration in the prodromal phase6.
about its aetiology, so it could be described as a disease. The evidence for several of these established risk
However, PD is heterogeneous so could also be consid­ and prodromal markers of PD has recently been
ered a syndrome18, or as an umbrella term under which reviewed26, and these markers form the basis of the
different and overlapping clinical and pathological sub­ MDS research criteria for prodromal PD25,26. Inclusion
types fit. Moreover, given that the pathology is similar in of a given marker in the MDS prodromal criteria gener­
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and pure autonomic ally required that the marker had predicted PD onset in
failure, suggesting a common and overlapping patho­ at least two independent prospective studies. With the
physiology, PD could be considered a subclassification use of a naive Bayesian classifier, these criteria enable
under an even larger umbrella of Lewy body disorders practical and evidence­ based calculation of the proba­
or neuronal synucleinopathies3,19–22. bility that an individual has prodromal PD on the basis
Given that clinical PD is simultaneously heterogene­ of their age and marker profile (Supplementary Box 1
ous and can be classified under a larger umbrella, the and Supplementary data).
same is presumably true for prodromal PD. Therefore, The original research criteria25 have been validated
understanding variability in the prodromal phase of PD in different cohorts, and have relatively high specificity
is key to a holistic understanding of the full spectrum and a high positive predictive value for the conversion
of PD and could pave the way for early neuroprotective from probable prodromal PD (>80% probability) to
therapies that are specific to prodromal subtypes and clinical PD35–37. The sensitivity of the criteria varies and
consequently have high efficacy. In this Review, we pro­ depends primarily on the depth of marker assessment
vide an overview of the current clinical and pathophysio­ (highly predictive markers are required for high sensi­
logical understanding of prodromal PD before discussing tivity) and on the time to PD diagnosis (sensitivity drops
evidence of variable pathological propagation in PD and at early time points, when many features have not had
how this variability could relate to prodromal subtypes. time to develop)38. The criteria have been updated once
and will continue to be updated regularly26. In the latest
version, the likelihood ratio estimates of markers were
Author addresses
updated and four new markers were added. In addition,
1Department of neurology, Christian-A lbrechts- university, Kiel, Germany. a new approach for considering genetic risk markers was
2Department of nuclear medicine and PeT, Aarhus university Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. developed, which incorporated age­r elated penetrance
3Institute of Clinical medicine, Aarhus university, Aarhus, Denmark. of PD (for GBA28 and LRRK2 (ref.29) mutations) and
4Department of neurology and neurosurgery, mcGill university, montreal, Quebec,
polygenic risk scores calculated from low penetrance
Canada.
variants30.
5Division of neurology, Department of medicine, The ottawa Hospital, university of
Compelling evidence supports the inclusion of sev­
ottawa, ottawa, ontario, Canada.
eral other promising markers but fewer than two pro­
6Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society
(nvS), Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. spective studies had been completed for these when
7The Research Institute of the mcGill university Health Centre, montreal, Quebec, Canada. the prodromal criteria were updated. For instance, a
8Center for Advanced Research in Sleep medicine, Hôpital du Sacré-C œur de montréal, meta­ analysis has shown that detection of phospho­
montreal, Quebec, Canada. rylated α­s ynuclein in the skin had a pooled sensitivity
350 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
of 76% and a specificity of 100% for identification of variable; this is an oversimplification that might be mis­
patients with PD, and detection in the submandibular leading. For example, analysis of sample sizes for clini­
gland had a sensitivity of 66% and a specificity of 96%39. cal trials in RBD suggests that milestones of decline on
Cross­s ectional studies have shown that this α­s ynuclein quantitative measures (for example, motor and/or cog­
pathology is present in the majority of people with nitive scales) are more efficient outcomes than pheno­
RBD — given that >80% of people with RBD develop PD conversion (and are also less difficult to define48). The
or DLB and α­s ynuclein pathology is more common in zero–one distinction might also be an oversimplification
RBD­p ositive PD than in RBD­n egative PD, α­s ynuclein with respect to disease heterogeneity, and prodromal
in the skin or submandibular gland is likely to be a highly PD subgroups might be needed. From the perspective
specific marker of prodromal PD40. In addition, neuro­ of patients, prodromal PD is also highly relevant because
imaging modalities, such as PET, single­p hoton emission patients often have considerable disease burden from a
CT (SPECT) and MRI, have high potential for meas­ variety of (especially non­m otor) symptoms long before
urement of sensitive and specific markers of progressive they are ‘labelled’ and treated as patients with PD49.
neurodegeneration in prodromal PD15,41. Similarly, sub­
tle abnormalities and progressive changes in motor42,43 PD heterogeneity and the prodrome
and non­ motor markers44,45 in prodromal PD can be Before exploring the potential heterogeneity of prodro­
detected with wearable and smartphone­ based sen­ mal PD, it is useful to review what is known about the
sor technologies. In these areas, the results of ongoing heterogeneity of clinical PD. Several different pheno­
prospective studies are awaited. types of PD have been identified, each with different
Despite this progress in identification of prodromal clinical characteristics and progression (fig. 1). Broadly
PD, several missing pieces remain. For instance, the speaking, PD subtypes proposed to date have been based
predictive values of risk and prodromal markers can on either single features or multidomain phenotypes.
depend on the time to PD diagnosis, marker­ specific
lead times and increases in the strength of the marker Single- feature classifiers
in the time that precedes PD diagnosis. If markers are Age. Manifestations of PD differ considerably according
correlated or have pathophysiological interactions, to age — the most striking differences are seen in motor
their predictive values might be higher or lower than fluctuations and cognition. In general, younger patients
if they are considered independently26,46. Furthermore, are more likely to experience a dramatic motor benefit
the clinical trajectories of people with RBD, who are with levodopa treatment and subsequently more motor
likely to be a fairly homogeneous prodromal subgroup, fluctuations and dyskinesia. By contrast, dementia
have been investigated more extensively7,47 than those occurs almost exclusively in older patients, and cognitive
of population­ based cohorts, even though the findings impairment is more related to current age than to disease
in these cohorts would be more generalizable to the duration50. The mechanism by which age affects pheno­
heterogeneous spectrum of (prodromal) PD. type is unclear; plausible mechanisms include a higher
Another important consideration is that prodromal prevalence of co­m orbid pathology (which is common
PD is considered to be a bona fide stage of PD. Studies in autopsy samples from people with PD)51,52 and a
of prodromal markers have so far considered the end more diffuse vulnerability to the spread of α­ synuclein
point of phenoconversion to clinical PD as a zero–one pathology or α­s ynuclein­a ssociated damage. Numerous
Advanced
Early clinical PD clinical PD
Age at Dominant: Non-motor Cognitive Progression
onset motor burden burden
phenotype
Young Tremor Low Low Slow
RBD-negative
GBA non-mutant Motor benign
LRRK2-mutant subtypes
Intermediate
Example subtypes
prodromal
phenotypes
LRRK2 non-mutant
Diffuse
GBA-mutant malignant
RBD-positive subtypes
Old PIGD High High Fast
Fig. 1 | Characteristics of prodromal PD subtypes. Each trajectory shows the characteristics of a different prodromal
subtype in early clinical Parkinson disease (PD) and the associated rate of progression in advanced clinical PD. For each
subtype, the identifying clinical markers differ at the earliest stages of disease and could affect the stage at which a
diagnosis of PD is made. PIGD, postural instability and gait disturbance; RBD, REM sleep behaviour disorder.
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 351
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
exceptions to this rule exist; many 90­ year­ old patients and DLB (which together can be classed as Lewy body
experience dyskinesia, and dementia can develop before disease) must be developed.
the age of 60 years, particularly in some patients with
genetic mutations, such as a mutation in the GBA gene Multi- domain phenotyping
or SNCA gene triplication. Moreover, age is a continuous Data- driven clustering. Advanced statistical, data­d riven
variable and no clear cut­ off can be defined to distin­ techniques, such as machine learning, can be used to
guish ‘young PD’ and ‘old PD’, which limits the use of explore variations between patients who have been diag­
age as a basis for categorical subtypes. nosed with a single disease. The most commonly used
approach is unsupervised clustering, in which, in simple
Motor phenotypes. Patients with tremor in PD often do terms, a group of patients are phenotyped, phenotypic
better on average than those without53. Several classifica­ variables are standardized and the clustering algorithm
tions have been used to distinguish PD with tremor from sorts patients into subtypes on the basis of these varia­
‘other’ types of PD. Most approaches reveal prognostic bles. This type of cluster analysis has the major advan­
differences, although these differences are relatively tages of being hypothesis­ free, enabling discovery of
small. Gait, rather than tremor itself, could be the pri­ otherwise unanticipated variables, and capable of simul­
mary driver of differences between motor phenotypes; taneous interrogation of many motor and non­ motor
postural­ instability­ gait­ predominant phenotypes are clinical features53. As knowledge of non­ dopaminergic
associated with faster cognitive decline and a higher and non­m otor features has increased, non­ motor var­
prevalence of many non­ motor symptoms than other iables have increasingly been included in such studies,
forms. The observed links between motor phenotype which has dramatically improved multidomain clus­
and prognosis are partially confounded by the prompt­ tering. From these studies, cognitive impairment, sleep
ness of diagnosis, because tremor is an effective early disorders, autonomic dysfunction and hallucinations
diagnostic signal of PD, and by diagnostic errors (severe have emerged as important determinants of subtypes.
atypical parkinsonian conditions, such as multiple sys­ When non­ motor and motor variables are included in
tem atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy, these models, many non­ motor variables are stronger
do not often present with tremor)3. Exceptions to the determinants of subtype than are motor features11,53.
finding that gait subtypes are associated with worse PD One major disadvantage of data­ driven clustering
also exist; for example, patients with LRRK2 mutations is that study­ specific factors, such as patient recruit­
classically have prominent gait dysfunction but an ment bias, the variables included and the statistical
otherwise good prognosis, especially with respect to methods used, mean that each cluster solution is its own
non­m otor features, such as dementia, a clinical history entity, making it difficult to identify unifying themes
of RBD and autonomic dysfunction54. between studies. Regardless, perhaps the most consis­
tent group that emerges from these different analyses
Dementia at onset. Previously, dementia at onset was is a subtype with a poor prognosis, also described as a
considered to be an exclusion criterion for PD. However, diffuse–malignant subtype11,12,53, where ‘diffuse’ implies
according to the current MDS criteria, PD can now be a broad pattern of non­ motor and motor features and
diagnosed irrespective of the presence or onset time of ‘malignant’ implies a poor overall prognosis. This sub­
dementia3,22. Therefore, PD with early­ onset demen­ type is broadly characterized by an older age at onset,
tia could be considered a subtype. The phenotype of dominant non­ motor manifestations, especially in the
patients who are diagnosed with DLB generally resem­ cognitive domain, and more rapid progression to mile­
bles the so­c alled diffuse–malignant subtype of PD (see stones such as dementia, a requirement for gait assis­
Data­ driven clustering), including a limited response tance, institutionalization and death11,12,53,56. Patients
to levodopa, prominent gait abnormalities, a clini­ with the diffuse–malignant subtype experience a high
cal history of RBD and orthostatic hypotension. This burden of non­ motor features from the earliest stages,
observation is consistent with the fact that people with particularly RBD, dysautonomia and cognitive impair­
idiopathic RBD (iRBD) have an approximately equal risk ment. Many patients with idiopathic RBD develop this
of developing PD or DLB first and, therefore, are often diffuse–malignant subtype of PD when they phenocon­
included in this same diffuse–malignant subtype. vert. This subtype also overlaps with DLB and probably
Co­m orbid pathology could be an important driver includes many people who have been diagnosed with
of dementia­ onset PD — one autopsy study indicated DLB. Many cluster analyses have also identified a sub­
that 89% of patients with DLB had co­m orbid amyloid­β type at the other end of the spectrum characterized by
and α­ synuclein pathology, and the same was seen in a younger age at onset (but not always), less non­m otor
38% of patients with PD dementia51,52. If patients with involvement, more tremor predominance (although
DLB are included under a Lewy body or PD umbrella, this is not invariable), slower progression and a better
then diffuse–malignant PD subtypes could be much prognosis with respect to both cognitive and motor
more common than apparent when only patients who function, although motor fluctuations often occur10,53–55.
develop parkinsonism first are considered. Criteria When considering the findings of any cluster anal­
for prodromal DLB were published in 2020 (ref.55); the yses, we must also take into account findings from
purpose of these criteria was limited to identification of studies in people with de novo PD because instability of
patients with mild cognitive impairment with underly­ motor phenotypes and transition from one phenotype to
ing Lewy body pathology. As the fields of PD and DLB another have been reported in de novo PD57,58 and mod­
continue to converge, unified criteria for prodromal PD erate stages of the disease59. These observations challenge
352 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
the definitions of stable motor subtypes. Associations of patients with de novo PD showed that CSF levels of
between the subtypes and biomarkers and clinical α­ synuclein are low in the non­ tremor­ dominant
markers are generally modest. This difficulty could be subtype of PD68 and that CSF levels of amyloid­ β and
a reflection of the lack of biomarkers for PD as much phosphorylated tau are low in the postural instability
as a reflection of the clinical phenotyping. Nevertheless, and gait disturbance subtype69. In patients with PD, an
some associations are seen. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD­ like CSF profile — that is, low levels of amyloid­ β
analysis has shown that patients with diffuse–malignant and high levels of tau — correlates with older age, pres­
subtypes of PD are more likely to have an Alzheimer­l ike ence of the APOE ε4 allele, early cognitive impairment
CSF profile, with high levels of amyloid­β and low levels and reduced grey matter in the frontal cortex70. The
of tau60. Dopamine transporter (DaT) SPECT findings diffuse–malignant subtype of PD has also been associ­
might enable identification of the more severe clinical ated with this AD­l ike CSF profile61. These observations
phenotypes — caudate dopaminergic denervation is a suggest that an underlying co­ morbid AD pathology is
possible predictor of subtypes that involve extensive cog­ present in some patients with this subtype of PD and
nitive impairment60,61. MRI might be useful for seeing can substantially influence the clinical presentation.
atrophy and disruption of connectivity in patients with Patients with classically­ defined DLB also have low
diffuse–malignant subtypes, although studies remain CSF levels of amyloid­ β, again suggesting overlap with
limited62,63. Finally, autopsy and biopsy studies have diffuse–malignant PD subtypes.
shown that patients with RBD or diffuse–malignant PD Protein amplification assays, which were developed
have a higher burden of α­ synuclein deposition across in the prion disease field, have shown great promise for
the brain and in the gut than people with other subtypes, accurate CSF­ based diagnosis of PD71. These assays can
suggesting that the pathophysiology in these patients is detect α­s ynuclein seeding activity across the spectrum
driven by α­ synuclein to a greater extent than that of of Lewy body disorders including PD, iRBD, DLB and
other subtypes12,40,64. pure autonomic failure with a sensitivity and specific­
ity of >95%72. Although this finding suggests a core,
Non- motor endophenotypes. A different approach to homogeneous cause of PD, detailed characterization of
exploring heterogeneity is to classify clinical symptoms α­s ynuclein might reveal differences in α­s ynuclein con­
rather than patients. Use of this approach has led to the formations (so­ called strains) between different Lewy
proposal of non­ motor endophenotypes that fit into body disorders and between subtypes of PD.
neurotransmitter­ based models65 in which neurochem­ Skin biopsies have revealed deposits of α­ synuclein
ical deficits in adrenergic, serotonergic, opioidergic and in dermal nerve fibres in various synucleinopathies,
cholinergic pathways occur in addition to dopamin­ including PD, DLB and MSA. Two studies have shown
ergic involvement66,67. In one cluster analysis of non­ that this abnormal deposition is detectable during
motor symptoms, various phenotypic traits were united the prodromal stage in individuals with RBD16,73. As a
into symptom clusters, including a depression and minimally invasive method, skin biopsy seems to be
excessive sleepiness cluster and a cognitive impairment a suitable candidate measure to screen for prodromal
and apathy cluster. For some of these endophenotyping PD during enrolment in trials of disease­ modifying,
solutions, the presumed underlying pathophysiology α­ synuclein­ based therapies. α­ Synuclein deposits can
includes distinct routes of spread of pathology, resulting also be detected in biopsy samples of other peripheral
in different dominant patterns of involvement in PD. For tissues, such as submandibular or minor salivary glands
example, RBD, daytime somnolence and dysautonomia and submucosal enteral tissue — these biopsies are
are the prominent non­m otor manifestations in patients more invasive than skin biopsy but could be considered
with a brainstem dominance of pathology. By contrast, as alternatives74–76. Whether the characteristics of PD
depression, fatigue and early anosmia characterize an differ between patients with positive biopsies and those
olfactory­ to­l imbic pattern of pathology and early cog­ without remains to be seen.
nitive deficits and apathy are features of a neocortical Several studies have identified associations between
route of spread. These three patterns are the dominant other biochemical markers, such as amyloid­ β, apolipo­
non­ motor endophenotypes66,67. protein A1, C‐reactive protein, uric acid and vitamin D
in the blood or CSF, and different subtypes of PD.
Biomarker- based subtypes. Few attempts to define PD However, these studies involved post hoc comparisons
subtypes on the basis of biomarkers have been success­ of biomarkers between clinically defined PD subtypes,
ful. One obvious obstacle is the fact that PD is defined so the markers identified do not enable a new method
clinically; therefore, omitting clinical manifestations of categorizing PD77,78.
from subtyping solutions is problematic. As a result,
rather than being used to define distinct subtypes them­ Imaging prodromal PD
selves, biochemical markers have largely been assessed Given that parkinsonism emerges when >50% of striatal
for their association with clinical features or with previ­ dopamine terminals are lost79, dopamine imaging is well
ously defined clinical subtypes of PD. The biomarkers suited to the monitoring of preclinical loss in this sys­
studied have largely been CSF markers and α­s ynuclein tem. Indeed, presynaptic dopamine imaging markers are
deposits in tissue biopsies. abnormal in approximately 30–40% of people with idi­
CSF biomarkers in PD are less robust than those in, opathic RBD80, although abnormalities are more exten­
for example, Alzheimer disease (AD), so subtyping of sive among patients with newly diagnosed PD81. Several
PD based on such markers remains difficult. One study studies have shown that pathological DaT SPECT scans
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 353
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
indicate imminent phenoconversion in people with Overall, measures of presynaptic dopaminergic
iRBD or hyposmia34,82,83. degeneration and of cardiac sympathetic denervation
Far less dopamine imaging data are available on must currently be considered the most robust imaging
other types of prodromal PD. In studies of people with markers of neurodegeneration in prodromal PD. The
non­ manifest mutations associated with PD, only 11% excellent signal­ to­ noise properties of these methods
of people with LRRK2 mutations and 3% of people with enables sensitive detection of subclinical neurodegen­
GBA mutations exhibited a deficit upon DaT imaging84. eration at the individual patient level. These measures
The contrast with findings in patients with iRBD are not can, therefore, assist in determining whether particular
surprising, as RBD symptoms signify that brainstem PD subtypes are characterized by initial degeneration
neurodegeneration is already pronounced, whereas of CNS structures or by early damage to the peripheral
imaging markers are likely to be normal in people with autonomic nervous system.
mutations but no symptoms.
Advanced MRI sequences can also be used to visual­ Possible subtypes of prodromal PD
ize the substantia nigra itself. This approach has demon­ A good deal of research has been conducted on the
strated that dorsal nigral hyperintensity is reduced in subtyping of clinical PD but not on the subtyping of
27% of patients with idiopathic RBD85. Concordantly, prodromal stages. Below, we describe some ways in
transcranial sonography has revealed nigral hyperecho­ which prodromal PD could be subtyped, with direct
genicity in 35–50% of patients with iRBD, although the implications for clinical PD. These categorical bounda­
same was seen in >10% of healthy controls86,87. ries should not be considered absolute — some patients
A small number of imaging studies have been con­ who seem to have one prodromal subtype could ulti­
ducted to investigate the involvement of other CNS mately resemble patients with another subtype once
nuclei and neurotransmitter systems in prodromal clinical PD develops. In addition, these subtypes reflect
PD. Imaging of neuromelanin has revealed a low sig­ our current knowledge; other ways to subtype prodro­
nal in the locus coeruleus in 40–50% of people with mal PD are certain to exist but are yet to be discovered
iRBD, whereas this signal is normal in people with de and developed.
novo PD and no RBD15,88. This finding is consistent
with the notion that RBD is caused in part by dam­ REM sleep behaviour disorder subtypes
age to the coeruleus and subcoeruleus nuclei. Imaging iRBD is by far the strongest clinical marker of prodro­
with 11C­ MeNER PET has shown that noradrenergic mal synucleinopathy. Multicentre studies have shown
transporter density is low in the sensory–motor corti­ that >80% of patients with iRBD will develop either
ces of people with iRBD, which could signify an early PD, DLB or MSA (in rare cases), and studies with the
mechanism to compensate for incipient dopaminergic longest follow­ up periods suggest that nearly all will
neurodegeneration89. Upregulation of vesicular cho­ eventually develop a neurodegenerative disease97–99. The
linergic transporters in the brainstem has also been phenoconversion rate is ~6–7% per year, and a slightly
observed in people with iRBD, which could signify greater proportion of patients with iRBD progress to
another compensatory mechanism90. Similarly, people a parkinsonism­ first phenotype than a dementia­ first
with non­ manifest LRRK2 mutations exhibit regional pheno type (55% versus 45%)46. The risk can be stratified
upregulation of subcortical serotonin transporters and further with inclusion of other prodromal markers; for
greater cortical cholinergic activity than controls with­ example, co­e xistent olfactory loss, subtle parkinsonism
out mutations91,92. These findings demonstrate that some and mild cognitive impairment are associated with a
imaging measures of neurodegeneration can be compli­ hazard ratio of ~3 for phenoconversion compared with
cated by homeostatic regulatory mechanisms, particu­ patients with RBD but without these markers, and auto­
larly during the early disease stages, thereby impeding nomic markers, severe loss of REM atonia and DaT
their use as reliable markers of prodromal PD or disease SPECT abnormalities are associated with a 1.5­ fold to
progression. 2.5­ fold increase in conversion rate46. Numerous other
Imaging can also be used to detect involvement of biomarkers (for example, MRI, and electroencephalo­
the peripheral autonomic nervous system, which is gram and electrocardiogram abnormalities) are also
unique to Lewy body disorders among the neurode­ being explored as predictive markers of phenoconversion
generative diseases. 123I­M IBG scintigraphy has demon­ in RBD (see Imaging prodromal PD).
strated that marked cardiac sympathetic denervation is The study of patients with RBD can also be used to
nearly ubiquitous among patients with iRBD15,93,94. By map progression of prodromal disease over time. For
contrast, MIBG scans are normal in 40–50% of patients example, a 10­ year retrospective analysis of people
with de novo PD (at Hoehn and Yahr stage I)94,95. These who phenoconverted from RBD to PD/DLB found that
findings suggest that patients with prodromal PD but olfactory loss and autonomic dysfunction were the first
without RBD mostly have intact cardiac innervation96. markers to emerge at 15–20 years before phenoconver­
Studies of the parasympathetic innervation of the colon sion, followed by motor and cognitive changes 4–8 years
with 11C­d onepezil PET and CT produced similar find­ before phenoconversion7.
ings: in patients with de novo PD and RBD and patients This knowledge of progression from RBD to Lewy
with iRBD the colonic PET signal is markedly reduced body disease and its predictability means that people
compared with that in healthy controls, whereas findings with iRBD are the ideal candidates for trials of neuropro­
in patients with de novo PD but no RBD are similar to tective treatments, as treatment can be provided to these
those in controls96. people before irreversible nigral neurodegeneration has
354 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
Body-first PD Limbic system Brain-first PD other classic DLB hallmarks (hallucination, fluctuations)
and amygdala Amygdala
Substantia nigra Substantia nigra and a higher mortality100.
FDOPA ↓↓ FDOPA ↓↓ Together, these findings imply that iRBD should be
Parkinsonism Parkinsonism considered a specific subtype of prodromal PD or DLB.
Cohort studies have shown that individuals with an RBD
Locus coeruleus Locus coeruleus prodromal subtype usually develop bradykinesia and
Neuromelanin ↓↓ Neuromelanin ↓
RBD No RBD rigidity early and tremor evolves later, closer to the time
of PD diagnosis7. By contrast, in non­ RBD prodromal
Dorsal motor nucleus Heart Dorsal motor nucleus Heart subtypes, tremor often precedes apparent bradykinesia
Donepezil PET ↓↓ MIBG ↓↓ Donepezil PET normal MIBG normal and rigidity33. This distinction in prodromal subtypes
Stellate ganglion Stellate ganglion could be clinically important because if iRBD is a sub­
type of prodromal PD and DLB, insights gained from the
Coeliac ganglion Coeliac ganglion study of patients with this condition might not apply to
patients without it. For example, patients with PD but
Sympathetic pathway Vagal pathway Sympathetic pathway Vagal pathway
not RBD might be less likely to present with many of
the distinctive non­ motor features, such as autonomic
Intestine Intestine dysfunction or detectable cognitive loss. Whether olfac­
tion would differ between these prodromal subtypes is
unclear. With fewer non­ motor features, patients with
non­ RBD prodromal PD might be more difficult to
identify. Moreover, given that these patients lack many
of the longest­i nterval prodromal markers and are more
Fig. 2 | Characteristics of proposed body-first and brain-first subtypes of PD. Arrows likely to present with tremor, thereby resulting in an
indicate the direction of spread of α-s ynuclein pathology and the orange boxes indicate early diagnosis of PD, their observable prodromal state
the predicted imaging findings and symptoms at the time when motor symptoms first might also be considerably shorter than patients with an
emerge. In body-f irst Parkinson disease (PD; left), the first α-s ynuclein aggregation occurs RBD prodrome, providing less opportunity to intervene
in the gut and propagates through the autonomic nervous system to the spinal cord with neuroprotective therapies.
and brainstem. Autonomic dysfunction and REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) are
prodromal features. In brain-f irst PD (right), the initial α-s ynuclein pathology arises in Body-f irst and brain-f irst subtypes
vulnerable structures of the brain, such as the limbic system, or enters via an olfactory
The initial pathological aggregation and propagation of
route. The pathology then descends through the brainstem and RBD and dysautonomia
α­ synuclein can occur in the brain or the periphery101,
generally develop after the onset of parkinsonism. During the later disease stages, nearly
all patients have widespread pathology in these systems and their symptomatology and this observation has led to the hypothesis that
therefore converges. FDOPA, fluorodopa. Adapted with permission from ref.96, Oxford PD comprises two overall subtypes: a body­ first (or
University Press. bottom­ up) subtype, in which α­ synuclein pathology
originates in the autonomic and enteric nervous system
and invades the CNS via the vagus nerve and sympa­
occurred and at a time when symptomatic treatments for thetic connectome, and a brain­ first (top­ down) sub­
parkinsonism or dementia do not confound outcomes. type, in which pathology arises in the brain itself, most
Given the fact that patients with iRBD can develop par­ often in the limbic system or sometimes secondary to
kinsonism and dementia, treatments that target general entry via the olfactory bulb, and descends through the
mechanisms, such as α­s ynuclein pathology, are ideal for brainstem and into the periphery81 (fig. 2). These sub­
such neuroprotective trials. types align well with data from post­ mortem studies
Although nearly all patients with iRBD develop PD or and established neuropathological staging systems in
DLB, not all people with PD or DLB develop iRBD first PD and DLB. Post­ mortem studies have identified two
or go on to develop it at all. At motor symptom onset, overarching profiles of Lewy pathology in the brain of
only 30% of patients with PD have RBD. Similarly, only patients with PD or DLB: a brainstem­ predominant
~50% of patients with clinically manifest PD and 75% pattern of α­ synuclein pathology that hypothetically
of people with DLB or MSA have RBD. However, these corresponds with the body­ first subtype, and a limbic­
proportions might be underestimates of the occurrence predominant pattern that corresponds with the brain­f irst
of RBD over the entire course of the illness, as the fre­ subtype19,102–105.
quency of polysomnography­v erified RBD in late­s tage In this framework, premotor RBD is tightly linked
PD and DLB has not been documented. In addition, to the body­ first type, since ascending α­ synuclein
dream enactment is a necessary criterion for the diag­ pathology affects pontine structures before the nigral
nosis of RBD but this symptom can disappear over time, dopamine neurons. By contrast, patients with the
possibly leading to underestimation of the proportion of brain­ first subtype usually do not have RBD when
individuals affected. Nevertheless, RBD is a key marker motor symptoms emerge, although top­ down RBD
of diffuse–malignant PD subtypes. In this context, RBD can develop once the pons becomes damaged. Thus,
is associated with cognitive loss, severe autonomic dys­ body­ first and brain­ first PD are not synonymous
function, fast motor progression (particularly in gait) with RBD­ positive and RBD­ negative PD. The rela­
and loss of independent living and mortality12. Similarly tionship between RBD and brain­ first and body­ first
in patients with DLB, RBD is associated with specific subtypes of PD was investigated in a multimodal imag­
clinical characteristics, including more parkinsonism, ing study, which showed that patients with iRBD and
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 355
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
patients with de novo PD and premotor RBD follow the a definitive classification of PD, but as clinicopathological
expected body­ first trajectory, characterized by initial phenotypes that explain a large degree of the phenotypic
loss of cardiac sympathetic innervation and intesti­ variance among patients with PD and reconcile clinical
nal parasympathetic innervation followed by damage and imaging findings with longstanding neuropathologi­
to the nigrostriatal dopamine system96. By contrast, cal observations. However, other important factors, such
patients with de novo PD but no RBD follow the oppo­ a genetic predisposition and variable selective neuronal
site trajectory: initial loss of the nigrostriatal dopa­ vulnerability, are likely to underlie additional variance
mine innervation but relatively intact sympathetic and in clinical presentation and progression patterns108.
parasympathetic innervation96 (fig. 3). Furthermore, the brain­ first and body­ first hypothesis
If correct, the hypothesis has important implications has been tested only recently in a single cohort of patients
for our understanding of Lewy body disorders. For with PD96. The findings must, therefore, be replicated by
example, some triggering factors, such as microbiome other researchers to determine their robustness. In par­
alterations106,107 and leaky gut syndrome, could predis­ ticular, longitudinal studies in people with prodromal PD
pose to the body­ first subtype. In addition, the bio­ are needed to track the rate of neurodegeneration in each
markers that are relevant for prodromal diagnosis and subtype, establish the rate of phenoconversion and deter­
monitoring of progression would be subtype­d ependent. mine to what degree prodromal brain­f irst and body­f irst
For instance, normal cardiac MIBG scintigraphy find­ subtypes can be unequivocally defined and what other
ings does not rule out prodromal PD, as most patients variables modulate the phenotype and/or conversion.
with the brain­ first subtype initially have normal
MIBG scans. Imaging­ based strategies for monitoring Genetic subtypes
disease progression would also be more complicated. Genetics can determine clinical phenotypes of PD, so
Once identifiable at an early prodromal stage, progres­ almost certainly have implications for prodromal pheno­
sion of body­ first PD might be best monitored with types as well. Common genetic variants account for
MIBG scintigraphy, as cardiac denervation commences ~22% of the heritable risk of PD30, and a high polygenic
5–15 years before loss of the nigrostriatal dopamine risk score for PD has been associated with more severe
system, whereas progression of prodromal brain­ first motor and cognitive decline in people with clinical PD109.
PD would be best monitored with dopamine imaging, Whether low­p enetrance genetic variants lead to pheno­
as loss of dopaminergic innervation begins years before typic differences in the prodromal phase is still unclear.
the autonomic system is affected. However, evidence suggests that genetic variants in single
Important to keep in mind is that the body­f irst and genes can define distinct prodromal phenotypes.
brain­f irst subtypes should currently not be considered Retrospective studies suggest that people with
mutations in GBA have a shorter but more severe pro­
dromal phase than people with PD without these muta­
Body-first PD Brain-first PD
18F-PE2I PET
tions110. GBA mutations are also more common among
people with RBD than among the general population
Striatal
dopamine of people with PD. Among patients with iRBD, those
with GBA mutations are indistinguishable from
those with the general RBD prodromal phenotype, but
their phenoconversion to clinical PD and DLB occurs
faster111. By contrast, LRRK2 mutations, in particular
the Gly2019Ser mutation, are associated with milder
non­ motor symptoms112. Neither olfactory loss nor RBD
are prominent features in prodromal LRRK2 PD113.
123I-MIBG These observations suggest that different prodromal
Cardiac phenotypes are inherent to genetic subgroups of GBA
sympathetic and LRRK2 mutation carriers. Interestingly, on the
terminal
basis of the clinical profiles associated with these muta­
tions, GBA and LRRK2 mutations might predispose to
body­ first and brain­ first PD, respectively. Nearly all
symptomatic patients with GBA mutations have abnor­
mal MIBG scan findings, whereas most people with
LRRK2 mutations have normal MIBG scan findings81.
Fig. 3 | Imaging markers of body-first and brain-first PD The degree to which the predictive values of risk and
subtypes. Striatal dopamine transporter imaging with prodromal markers in genetic subgroups are compara­
18F-PE2I PET and cardiac sympathetic terminal imaging
ble with those in purely idiopathic forms of PD requires
with 123I-M IBG scintigraphy shows that a patient with
further investigation.
isolated REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD; left) has
normal dopaminergic innervation but severely depleted
Biological subtypes
cardiac sympathetic innervation, which indicates
body-f irst Parkinson disease (PD). By contrast, a patient at Biological subtypes of prodromal PD are an attrac­
Hoehn and Yahr stage I of PD without RBD has marked tive concept, as such subtypes imply the possibility of
unilateral dopaminergic denervation but normal cardiac developing targeted causal therapy. Biological subtypes
sympathetic innervation, which indicates brain-f irst PD. would be defined on the basis that a specific biological
356 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
pathomechanism is the main cause of neurodegener­ with several risk factors for and prodromal markers of
ation and differentiates one group of individuals with PD, including physical inactivity, male sex, constipa­
prodromal PD from others. However, the evidence tion, not smoking and subthreshold parkinsonism106.
for specific biological subtypes even of manifest PD is However, the bidirectional links between these mark­
currently limited. ers, microbial changes and the risk of PD need further
Several biological pathomechanisms (such as mito­ investigation.
chondrial dysfunction, increased tissue iron content, Nevertheless, the Braak staging scheme might
autophagy, calcium dysbalance and inflammation114,115) not reflect the full heterogeneity of prodromal and
could contribute to PD pathogenesis, but we cannot clinical PD133,134. Several studies have suggested that
currently ascribe a unique subtype to each. These patho­ exceptions to the Braak spreading pattern occur in a
mechanisms might all contribute to many, if not all, substantial minority of patients135,136, and that antero­
subgroups of PD to different degrees. The degree to grade and retrograde propagation of α­ synuclein can
which a single pathomechanism contributes might be occur via the vagus nerve137–139; in this context, the
most pronounced in genetic forms of PD, but even in gut–brain hypothesis might need to be reconsidered.
these forms, multiple downstream mechanisms can Furthermore, the Braak staging model does not explain
be involved. Therefore, further work needs to be done cases in which dementia (reflecting synuclein pathology)
before biological subtypes can be implemented. starts first140.
Several alternatives to the Braak model have been
Pathophysiology and heterogeneity proposed. A spectrum of Lewy body disease has
Analysis of phenotypes to identify subtypes is only a been proposed that incorporates PD with and with­
starting point for identification of biological differ­ out dementia and DLB as three subtypes with different
ences between different prodromal subtypes. For exam­ pathological spread141. In another model, pathology in
ple, RBD is only a ‘wedge’ that enables body­ first and the olfactory bulb is proposed as stage 1 in all Lewy body
brain­ first phenotypes to be separated. This is not a disease, followed by either brain­s tem­d ominant spread
perfect separation — exceptions exist — and alternative or limbic­p redominant spread in stage 2 (ref.19).
‘wedges’ exist. Nevertheless, classification of subtypes on The differences in pathological spread might sim­
the basis of RBD led to a specific biological hypothesis ply be a reflection of the heterogeneity in Lewy body
that is testable and has clinical implications. diseases, and as yet undetermined factors could con­
The heterogeneity of PD and its prodromal states tribute to the variability in pathological spreading and
indicates that the underlying mechanisms of prodro­ need further investigation. In particular, additional
mal states must differ. In this section, we consider some pathologies, such as amyloid­ β and tau, can interact
possible mechanisms that could underlie prodromal with Lewy pathology and could, therefore, influence
heterogeneity. progression routes and clinical subtypes103,142–144. Such
factors have not been incorporated into current staging
Variable spread of synucleinopathy schemes of Lewy pathology (see Non­ PD pathologies).
Aggregation of α­ synuclein into Lewy bodies and the Furthermore, all staging schemes might fail to incorpo­
associated neurodegeneration can occur well beyond rate genetic forms of PD in which Lewy pathology is low
the substantia nigra during the prodromal stage of PD, or even absent145.
suggesting that the pathological heterogeneity of PD is
also present at the prodromal stage116–123. Previous evi­ Variable degenerative thresholds
dence of Lewy body pathology in individuals without Not all tissues are necessarily equally susceptible to
clinical symptoms — defined as incidental Lewy body damage from α­ synuclein. According to a ‘threshold
disease124 — already suggested slow preclinical pro­ theory’ proposed in 2017 (ref.146), parallel degenera­
gression of pathology, and this process was concep­ tion pathways might occur in the CNS and PNS but the
tualized in the Braak staging scheme102, in which the functional threshold at which early symptoms emerge is
dorsal nucleus of the vagus was proposed as the starting reached sooner than that for the classic motor features146.
point of pathology (with a possible role in the onset of This hypothesis could explain why symptoms such as
olfactory loss). hyposmia, RBD, constipation and other dysautonomias
Entry of α­ synuclein pathology into the brain from manifest early in the prodromal stage of PD. In a similar
the gastrointestinal system might be particularly impor­ theory of susceptibility, degeneration in the substantia
tant in prodromal PD as suggested by the presence of nigra and other nuclei is thought to be accelerated, per­
gastric α­ synuclein immunoreactive inclusions in haps owing to high energy demands as a result of high
the Meissner and Auerbach plexuses125. A role for the baseline activity and arborization24 or to certain types of
vagal nerve in propagation of α­ synuclein pathology pacemaker calcium channels23.
from the gut to the brain126,127 was proposed by Hawkes These threshold theories are largely based on findings
et al.128, and is supported by findings that vagotomy from animal models and do not account for the observed
reduces the risk of PD in humans129 and interrupts temporal evolution of damage to different neuronal sys­
the spread of α­ synuclein pathology in mice130,131. The tems or for the observed propagation of α­ synuclein.
enteral microbiome could also contribute to inflam­ Nevertheless, the underlying principle suggests another
mation and α­s ynuclein aggregation132. In a large study potential source of heterogeneity in PD — that is, patients
of the gut microbiome in healthy people, changes in might have different region­ specific functional thresh­
the composition of the microbiome were associated olds, meaning that different manifestations emerge first,
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 357
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
thereby leading to different prodromal stages. For exam­ Genetic factors also modulate prodromal subtypes,
ple, individuals who first develop RBD and subsequently as described above. Beyond direct effects of gene muta­
develop a diffuse–malignant clinical subtype might have tions on disease, genetics can also modulate the effects
a relatively resistant substantia nigra, resulting in later of environmental factors such as pesticide exposure150,
phenoconversion to parkinsonism despite advanced smoking151 and head injury152. Therefore, genetics might
neurodegeneration elsewhere. By contrast, patients who need to be considered for stratification of prodromal
present with a ‘benign motor­ dominant’ subtype might PD subgroups on the basis of some environmental risk
have a relatively low threshold in the dopaminergic sub­ factors. Finally, level of education is linked to differences
stantia nigra, leading to early parkinsonism and later in motor and cognitive reserve — highly educated people
development of non­ motor symptoms such as RBD, with PD have better baseline motor and cognitive func­
dysautonomia and cognitive deficits. tion than less highly educated patients153. Age of onset
and progression did not depend on level of education
Factors that modulate pathology in this study, but compensatory and reserve functions
The idea that PD should be seen as an umbrella term could be relevant to the prodrome of PD.
that encompasses a spectrum of disease has been dis­
cussed above (see Clinical heterogeneity). The hetero­ Conclusions and implications
geneity across this spectrum might be even more evident On the basis of our current understanding, recognition
in the prodromal phase when the motor features that of prodromal PD subtypes could influence the field in
unite the heterogeneous forms have not developed. several areas. The first of these is in understanding dis­
Moreover, neurodegenerative pathologies other than ease mechanisms. Clinical symptoms of prodromal
Lewy pathology — including amyloid­β and tau patho­ disease have a pathophysiological correlate, and an
logies, vascular pathologies and neuroinflammatory understanding of the variability in prodromal subtypes
pathology — could contribute to the heterogeneity. provides an opportunity to understand the mechanisms
by which patients can differ. In turn, understanding
Non- PD pathologies. Approximately 20% of people aged these variable mechanisms could lead to treatments that
65 years and >30% of people aged 80 years with nor­ can alter phenotype and prognosis.
mal cognition exhibit abnormal amyloid­ β deposition. The second area is the prediction of progression and
Amyloid­β deposits are known to accelerate α­s ynuclein phenoconversion. Within clinical PD, prognosis can
pathogenesis147, so co­ existent amyloid­ β pathology differ substantially between subtypes, and identification
in PD and DLB could drive ‘cortical­ first’ subtypes in of corresponding subtypes in early disease will provide
which dementia presents early. Analysis of CSF has prognostic information about the progression of neu­
shown that markers of tau pathology are associated with rodegeneration and the expected time of conversion
a more severe motor progression, whereas markers of to clinical PD. This improvement in prognosis has two
amyloid­β pathology are associated with future cognitive major implications. First, accurate prediction of the time
decline in PD148. These findings suggest that coincident to conversion is an important basis for disease­m odifying
amyloid­β and tau pathologies could underlie subtypes trials, which currently have no suitable outcome parame­
of clinical and prodromal PD. ters. Second, accurate prediction of disease progression
and manifestation of clinical symptoms is important for
Other factors. Ageing is associated with several natu­ individuals with probable prodromal PD, who currently
ral yet pathological alterations at the molecular, cel­ face high uncertainty in the absence of treatments.
lular, organ and system levels14 that could increase the A more complete understanding of prodromal sub­
selective vulnerability of certain neuronal groups and/or types will also enable us to determine the biases caused
synergistically drive the progression of PD­ specific by diagnostic difficulties. As discussed above, relatively
pathologies. For instance, age­related malfunction of diffuse subtypes would become easier to diagnose on the
proteostasis mechanisms could contribute to α­synuclein basis of diagnostic markers for these subtypes, enabling
misfolding149, resulting in a diffuse rather than a recruitment of a broader spectrum of patients into trials
‘mitochondrial’ pattern of selective substantia nigra of neuroprotective therapies.
degeneration, as is seen in young­o nset genetic PD. The existence of prodromal PD subtypes also
Environmental factors could also contribute to pro­ has implications for mechanism­ based diagnostics.
dromal and clinical subtypes. Such factors are usually Specifically, work to identify and validate diagnostic
thought of as risk factors, but causative environmental biomarkers of prodromal PD should take into account
factors could modulate phenotype. For example, a mito­ the value of these biomarkers in different subtypes. As an
chondrial toxin, such as a pesticide, could specifically example, changes in the microbiome, findings of gastro­
target the substantia nigra and related brainstem nuclei, intestinal biopsies and imaging markers could have dif­
resulting in a pure motor phenotype in which non­m otor ferent values in the proposed body­f irst and brain­f irst
manifestations and dementia occur late. In this scenario, subtypes. Finally, prodromal PD subtypes have similar
few non­m otor markers would be detectable in the pro­ implications for the development of mechanism­ based
dromal phase. Alternatively, a protective environmental therapies. In planning a trial of a neuroprotective ther­
factor could slow degeneration in the substantia nigra so apy in prodromal PD, one must consider whether pro­
that a patient might present relatively late in the course dromal subtypes defined on the basis of phenotype
of their synucleinopathy with a non­m otor­p redominant alone correspond to specific biological disease mech­
phenotype. anisms that could be targeted by the drug of interest.
358 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
Documented examples of a relationship between pheno­ with demonstrable mitochondrial dysfunction, such as
type and pathological mechanisms in PD are scarce. those with PRKN or PINK1 mutations.
However, these relationships are conceivable. For exam­ These implications make clear that knowledge
ple, given the strong connection between iRBD, diffuse of subtypes of prodromal PD as well as clinical PD is
synucleinopathy and GBA mutations, people with iRBD crucial for addressing PD with a precision medicine
might be good candidates for trials of therapies that tar­ approach. Knowledge of prodromal subtypes can be
get GBA or its product, glucocerebrosidase. By contrast, applied to the design of more efficient personalized
people with iRBD might not be suitable for trials of ther­ or subtype­ specific, multidisciplinary, patient­ centred
apies that target LRRK2, as RBD is relatively uncommon management approaches that can be initiated early in
among patients with LRRK2 mutations. Similarly, trials the prodromal stage.
of a therapy that targets mitochondrial function might
require enrolment of patients with prodromal subtypes Published online 20 April 2021
1. Mahlknecht, P., Seppi, K. & Poewe, W. The concept redefining Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. Trends 35. Fereshtehnejad, S.-M. et al. Validation of the MDS
of prodromal Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinson’s Dis. Neurosci. 42, 4–13 (2019). research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease:
5, 681–697 (2015). 18. Titova, N., Padmakumar, C., Lewis, S. J. G. & longitudinal assessment in a REM sleep behavior
2. Ahmadi, S. A. et al. Analyzing the co-l ocalization Chaudhuri, K. R. Parkinson’s: a syndrome rather than disorder (RBD) cohort. Mov. Disord. 32, 865–873
of substantia nigra hyper-e chogenicities and iron a disease? J. Neural Transm. 124, 907–914 (2017). (2017).
accumulation in Parkinson’s disease: a multi-m odal 19. Adler, C. H. et al. Unified staging system for Lewy 36. Mahlknecht, P. et al. Performance of the Movement
atlas study with transcranial ultrasound and MRI. body disorders: clinicopathologic correlations and Disorders Society criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s
NeuroImage Clin. 26, 102185 (2020). comparison to Braak staging. J. Neuropathol. Exp. disease: a population-b ased 10-year study. Mov.
3. Berg, D. et al. Time to redefine PD? Introductory Neurol. 78, 891–899 (2019). Disord. 33, 405–413 (2018).
statement of the MDS Task Force on the definition of 20. Kaufmann, H. et al. Natural history of pure autonomic 37. Mirelman, A. et al. Application of the Movement
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 29, 454–462 (2014). failure: a United States prospective cohort. Ann. Neurol. Disorder Society prodromal criteria in healthy
4. Savica, R. et al. Medical records documentation 81, 287–297 (2017). G2019S–LRRK2 carriers. Mov. Disord. 33, 966–973
of constipation preceding Parkinson disease: a case- 21. Walker, L., Stefanis, L. & Attems, J. Clinical and (2018).
control study. Neurology 73, 1752–1758 (2009). neuropathological differences between Parkinson’s 38. Pilotto, A. et al. Application of the Movement Disorder
5. Schrag, A., Horsfall, L., Walters, K., Noyce, A. & disease, Parkinson’s disease dementia and dementia Society prodromal Parkinson’s disease research
Petersen, I. Prediagnostic presentations of Parkinson’s with Lewy bodies – current issues and future criteria in 2 independent prospective cohorts.
disease in primary care: a case-c ontrol study. Lancet directions. J. Neurochem. 150, 467–474 (2019). Mov. Disord. 32, 1025–1034 (2017).
Neurol. 14, 57–64 (2015). 22. Postuma, R. B. et al. Abolishing the 1-year rule: 39. Tsukita, K., Sakamaki-Tsukita, H., Tanaka, K.,
Very large case–control study that showed How much evidence will be enough? Mov. Disord. 31, Suenaga, T. & Takahashi, R. Value of in vivo α-synuclein
higher incidence rates of several autonomic, 1623–1627 (2016). deposits in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review
neuropsychiatric and motor features in individuals 23. Surmeier, D. J., Obeso, J. A. & Halliday, G. M. and meta- analysis. Mov. Disord. 34, 1452–1463
2, 5 and 10 years before diagnosis of PD compared Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson disease. (2019).
with PD-f ree individuals using primary care data. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 101–113 (2017). 40. Leclair-V isonneau, L. et al. REM sleep behavior
6. Gustafsson, H., Nordstrom, A. & Nordstrom, P. 24. Giguère, N., Nanni, S. B. & Trudeau, L. E. On cell loss disorder is related to enteric neuropathology in
Depression and subsequent risk of Parkinson disease: and selective vulnerability of neuronal populations in Parkinson disease. Neurology 89, 1612–1618
a nationwide cohort study. Neurology 84, 2422–2429 Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurol. 9, 455 (2018). (2017).
(2015). 25. Berg, D. et al. MDS research criteria for prodromal 41. Barber, T. R., Klein, J. C., Mackay, C. E. & Hu, M. T. M.
7. Fereshtehnejad, S. M. et al. Evolution of prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 30, 1600–1611 Neuroimaging in pre-m otor Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies: (2015). Neuroimage. Clin. 15, 215–227 (2017).
a prospective study. Brain 142, 20151–22067 (2019). Original MDS research criteria for prodromal PD 42. Del Din, S. et al. Gait analysis with wearables predicts
In this study, natural evolution of various motor proposing an evidence-b ased method considering conversion to Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol. 86,
and non-m otor manifestations of parkinsonism is risk/prodromal marker evidence from prospective 357–367 (2019).
analysed using real-l ife longitudinal clinical data studies and a Bayesian classifier approach that 43. Hobert, M. A. et al. Progressive gait deficits in
from an RBD cohort. allows the calculation of prodromal PD probabilities Parkinson’s disease: a wearable-b ased biannual
8. Postuma, R. B. et al. MDS clinical diagnostic criteria based on age and individual marker profiles. 5-year prospective study. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11,
for Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 30, 1591–1601 26. Heinzel, S. et al. Update of the MDS research criteria 22 (2019).
(2015). for prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 34, 44. Merola, A. et al. Technology-b ased assessment
9. Greenland, J. C., Williams-G ray, C. H. & Barker, R. A. 1464–1470 (2019). of motor and nonmotor phenomena in Parkinson
The clinical heterogeneity of Parkinson’s disease and Most recent version of the MDS research criteria disease. Expert. Rev. Neurother. 18, 825–845 (2018).
its therapeutic implications. Eur. J. Neurosci. 49, for prodromal PD with updated predictive values 45. Alonso, A., Huang, X., Mosley, T. H., Heiss, G.
328–338 (2019). of markers, introduction of four new markers, new & Chen, H. Heart rate variability and the risk of
10. Iwaki, H. et al. Genetic risk of Parkinson disease and approaches to consider genetic risk markers for PD Parkinson disease: the Atherosclerosis Risk in
progression: an analysis of 13 longitudinal cohorts. prediction, and a web-b ased calculator. Communities Study. Ann. Neurol. 77, 877–883 (2015).
Neurol. Genet. 5, e348 (2019). 27. Schrag, A., Anastasiou, Z., Ambler, G., Noyce, A. 46. Heinzel, S. et al. Age- and sex-r elated heterogeneity
11. Fereshtehnejad, S.-M. et al. New clinical subtypes of & Walters, K. Predicting diagnosis of Parkinson’s in prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 33,
Parkinson disease and their longitudinal progression. disease: a risk algorithm based on primary care 1025–1027 (2018).
JAMA Neurol. 72, 863–873 (2015). presentations. Mov. Disord. 34, 480–486 (2019). 47. Postuma, R. B. et al. Risk and predictors of dementia
12. De Pablo-F ernández, E., Lees, A. J., Holton, J. L. 28. Anheim, M. et al. Penetrance of Parkinson disease in and parkinsonism in idiopathic REM sleep behaviour
& Warner, T. T. Prognosis and neuropathologic glucocerebrosidase gene mutation carriers. Neurology disorder: a multicentre study. Brain 142, 744–759
correlation of clinical subtypes of Parkinson disease. 78, 417–420 (2012). (2019).
JAMA Neurol. 76, 470–479 (2019). 29. Lee, A. J. et al. Penetrance estimate of LRRK2 48. Alotaibi, F., Pelletier, A., Gagnon, J., Montplaisir, J. Y.
13. Bäckström, D. et al. Early predictors of mortality in p.G2019S mutation in individuals of non-A shkenazi & Postuma, R. B. Prodromal marker progression
parkinsonism and Parkinson disease: a population- Jewish ancestry. Mov. Disord. 32, 1432–1438 in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior
based study. Neurology 91, e2045–e2056 (2018). (2017). disorder: sample size for clinical trials. Mov. Disord.
14. Hou, Y. et al. Ageing as a risk factor for 30. Nalls, M. A. et al. Identification of novel risk loci, 34, 1914–1919 (2019).
neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15, causal insights, and heritable risk for Parkinson’s 49. Schaeffer, E. et al. Patients’ views on the ethical
565–581 (2019). disease: a meta-a nalysis of genome-w ide association challenges of early Parkinson disease detection.
15. Knudsen, K. et al. In-v ivo staging of pathology in REM studies. Lancet Neurol. 18, 1091–1102 (2019). Neurology 94, e2037–e2044 (2020).
sleep behaviour disorder: a multimodality imaging 31. Nerius, M., Doblhammer, G. & Tamgüney, G. 50. Anang, J. B. M. et al. Predictors of dementia in
case- control study. Lancet. Neurol. 17, 618–628 GI infections are associated with an increased risk Parkinson disease: a prospective cohort study.
(2018). of Parkinson’s disease. Gut 69, 1154–1156 (2020). Neurology 83, 1253–1260 (2014).
Multimodal neuroimaging study showing a 32. Marras, C., Canning, C. G. & Goldman, S. M. 51. Dugger, B. N. et al. Concomitant pathologies among
caudorostral gradient of dysfunction in RBD Environment, lifestyle, and Parkinson’s disease: a spectrum of parkinsonian disorders. Park. Relat.
patients suggesting that pathological spread in implications for prevention in the next decade. Disord. 20, 525–529 (2014).
PD may initially involve peripheral autonomic Mov. Disord. 34, 801–811 (2019). 52. Robinson, J. L. et al. Neurodegenerative disease
nerves and subsequently the rostral brainstem. 33. Darweesh, S. K. L. et al. Trajectories of prediagnostic concomitant proteinopathies are prevalent,
16. Doppler, K. et al. Dermal phospho-a lpha-synuclein functioning in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 140, age-r elated and APOE4-associated. Brain 141,
deposits confirm REM sleep behaviour disorder as 429–441 (2017). 2181–2193 (2018).
prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 34. Jennings, D. et al. Conversion to Parkinson disease in 53. Fereshtehnejad, S. M. & Postuma, R. B. Subtypes
133, 535–545 (2017). the PARS hyposmic and dopamine transporter-d eficit of Parkinson’s disease: what do they tell us about
17. Johnson, M. E., Stecher, B., Labrie, V., Brundin, L. & prodromal cohort. JAMA Neurol. 74, 933–940 disease progression? Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 17,
Brundin, P. Triggers, facilitators, and aggravators: (2017). 34 (2017).
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 359
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
54. Kalia, L. V. et al. Clinical correlations with Lewy 79. Cheng, H.-C., Ulane, C. M. & Burke, R. E. Clinical 101. Milber, J. M. et al. Lewy pathology is not the first sign
body pathology in LRRK2-related Parkinson disease. progression in Parkinson disease and the neurobiology of degeneration in vulnerable neurons in Parkinson
JAMA Neurol. 72, 100–105 (2015). of axons. Ann. Neurol. 67, 715–725 (2010). disease. Neurology 79, 2307–2314 (2012).
55. McKeith, I. G. et al. Research criteria for the diagnosis 80. Bauckneht, M. et al. Presynaptic dopaminergic 102. Braak, H. et al. Staging of brain pathology related to
of prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology neuroimaging in REM sleep behavior disorder: a sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 24,
94, 743–755 (2020). systematic review and meta-a nalysis. Sleep. Med. Rev. 197–211 (2003).
56. de Lau, L. M. L., Verbaan, D., van Rooden, S. M., 41, 266–274 (2018). 103. Raunio, A. et al. Lewy-r elated pathology exhibits
Marinus, J. & van Hilten, J. J. Relation of clinical 81. Borghammer, P. & Van Den Berge, N. Brain-f irst two anatomically and genetically distinct progression
subtypes in Parkinson’s disease with survival. versus gut-f irst Parkinson’s disease: a hypothesis. patterns: a population-b ased study of Finns aged 85+.
Mov. Disord. 29, 150–151 (2014). J. Parkinson’s Dis. 9, S281–S295 (2019). Acta Neuropathol. 138, 771–782 (2019).
57. Simuni, T. et al. How stable are Parkinson’s disease 82. Iranzo, A. et al. Dopamine transporter imaging deficit 104. McKeith, I. G. et al. Diagnosis and management
subtypes in de novo patients: analysis of the PPMI predicts early transition to synucleinopathy in idiopathic of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB
cohort? Park. Relat. Disord. 28, 62–67 (2016). rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder. Ann. Consortium. Neurology 65, 1863–1872 (2005).
58. Eisinger, R. S. et al. Motor subtype changes in early Neurol. 82, 419–428 (2017). 105. Kosaka, K., Yoshimura, M., Ikeda, K. & Budka, H.
Parkinson’s disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 43, 67–72 83. Iranzo, A. et al. Decreased striatal dopamine Diffuse type of Lewy body disease: progressive
(2017). transporter uptake and substantia nigra dementia with abundant cortical Lewy bodies and
59. Alves, G., Larsen, J. P., Emre, M., Wentzel-L arsen, T. hyperechogenicity as risk markers of synucleinopathy senile changes of varying degree – a new disease?
& Aarsland, D. Changes in motor subtype and risk for in patients with idiopathic rapid-e ye-movement sleep Clin. Neuropathol. 3, 185–192 (1984).
incident dementia in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. behaviour disorder: a prospective study [corrected]. 106. Heinzel, S. et al. Gut microbiome signatures of risk and
21, 1123–1130 (2006). Lancet. Neurol. 9, 1070–1077 (2010). prodromal markers of Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol.
60. Zhang, X. et al. Data-d riven subtyping of Parkinson’s 84. Simuni, T. et al. Clinical and dopamine transporter 88, 320–331 (2020).
disease using longitudinal clinical records: a cohort imaging characteristics of non-m anifest LRRK2 and 107. Heintz-B uschart, A. et al. The nasal and gut
study. Sci. Rep. 9, 797 (2019). GBA mutation carriers in the Parkinson’s Progression microbiome in Parkinson’s disease and idiopathic rapid
61. Fereshtehnejad, S. M., Zeighami, Y., Dagher, A. Markers Initiative (PPMI): a cross-s ectional study. eye movement sleep behavior disorder. Mov. Disord.
& Postuma, R. B. Clinical criteria for subtyping Lancet Neurol. 19, 71–80 (2020). 33, 88–98 (2018).
Parkinson’s disease: biomarkers and longitudinal 85. Barber, T. R. et al. Nigrosome 1 imaging in REM sleep 108. Burbulla, L. F. et al. Dopamine oxidation mediates
progression. Brain 140, 1959–1976 (2017). behavior disorder and its association with dopaminergic mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson’s
Using a comprehensive data-d riven approach, a decline. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 7, 26–35 (2020). disease. Science. 357, 1255–1261 (2017).
new multi-d omain subtyping method is suggested 86. Heller, J. et al. Brain imaging findings in idiopathic 109. Paul, K. C., Schulz, J., Bronstein, J. M., Lill, C. M.
in this article that has been shown to connect with REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) – a systematic & Ritz, B. R. Association of polygenic risk score
underlying pathological stages as well as imaging review on potential biomarkers for neurodegeneration. with cognitive decline and motor progression in
and CSF biomarkers. The authors provide a user- Sleep. Med. Rev. 34, 23–33 (2017). Parkinson disease. JAMA Neurol. 75, 360–366
friendly guideline and calculator to assign every 87. Unger, M. M. et al. Assessment of idiopathic rapid- (2018).
patient to a probable subtype. eye-movement sleep behavior disorder by transcranial 110. Zimmermann, M. et al. Patient’s perception: shorter
62. Zeighami, Y. et al. Assessment of a prognostic MRI sonography, olfactory function test, and FP-C IT-SPECT. and more severe prodromal phase in GBA-a ssociated
biomarker in early de novo Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 23, 596–599 (2008). PD. Eur. J. Neurol. 26, 694–698 (2018).
Neuroimage Clin. 24, 101986 (2019). 88. Ehrminger, M. et al. The coeruleus/subcoeruleus 111. Krohn, L. et al. GBA variants in REM sleep behavior
63. Abbasi, N. et al. Predicting severity and prognosis in complex in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep disorder: a multicenter study. Neurology 95,
Parkinson’s disease from brain microstructure and behaviour disorder. Brain 139, 1180–1188 (2016). e1008–e1016 (2020).
connectivity. Neuroimage Clin. 25, 102111 (2020). 89. Andersen, K. B. et al. Altered sensorimotor cortex 112. Pont-S unyer, C. et al. The prodromal phase of leucine-
64. Postuma, R. B. et al. REM sleep behavior disorder and noradrenergic function in idiopathic REM sleep rich repeat kinase 2-associated Parkinson disease:
neuropathology in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. behaviour disorder – a PET study. Park. Relat. Disord. clinical and imaging studies. Mov. Disord. 32,
30, 1413–1417 (2015). 75, 63–69 (2020). 726–738 (2017).
65. Di Battista, M. E. et al. Intercepting Parkinson disease 90. Bedard, M. A. et al. Brain cholinergic alterations in 113. Tolosa, E., Vila, M., Klein, C. & Rascol, O. LRRK2
non-m otor subtypes: a proof-o f-principle study in a idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder: a PET in Parkinson disease: challenges of clinical trials.
clinical setting. J. Neurol. Sci. 388, 186–191 (2018). imaging study with 18F- FEOBV. Sleep. Med. 58, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16, 97–107 (2020).
66. Marras, C. & Chaudhuri, K. R. Nonmotor features 35–41 (2019). 114. Antony, P. M. A., Diederich, N. J., Krüger, R.
of Parkinson’s disease subtypes. Mov. Disord. 31, 91. Liu, S. Y. et al. The effect of LRRK2 mutations on the & Balling, R. The hallmarks of Parkinson’s disease.
1095–1102 (2016). cholinergic system in manifest and premanifest stages FEBS J. 280, 5981–5993 (2013).
67. Sauerbier, A., Jenner, P., Todorova, A. & of Parkinson’s disease: a cross-s ectional PET study. 115. Lin, K. J. et al. The overcrowded crossroads:
Chaudhuri, K. R. Non motor subtypes and Parkinson’s Lancet Neurol. 17, 309–316 (2018). mitochondria, alpha-s ynuclein, and the endo-l ysosomal
disease. Park. Relat. Disord. 22, S41–S46 (2016). 92. Wile, D. J. et al. Serotonin and dopamine transporter system interaction in Parkinson’s disease. Int. J. Mol.
68. Kang, J. H. et al. CSF biomarkers associated with PET changes in the premotor phase of LRRK2 Sci. 20, 5312 (2019).
disease heterogeneity in early Parkinson’s disease: parkinsonism: cross-s ectional studies. Lancet Neurol. 116. Braak, H. et al. Amygdala pathology in Parkinson’s
the Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative study. 16, 351–359 (2017). disease. Acta Neuropathol. 88, 493–500 (1994).
Acta Neuropathol. 131, 935–949 (2016). 93. Miyamoto, T. et al. Reduced cardiac 123I- MIBG 117. Wakabayashi, K., Takahashi, H., Ohama, E. & Ikuta, F.
69. Kang, J. H. et al. Association of cerebrospinal fluid scintigraphy in idiopathic REM sleep behavior Parkinson’s disease: an immunohistochemical study
β-amyloid 1-42, t-t au, p-t au 181, and α- synuclein disorder. Neurology 67, 2236–2238 (2006). of Lewy body-c ontaining neurons in the enteric
levels with clinical features of drug-n aive patients 94. Kashihara, K., Imamura, T. & Shinya, T. Cardiac nervous system. Acta Neuropathol. 79, 581–583
with early Parkinson disease. JAMA Neurol. 70, 123I-M IBG uptake is reduced more markedly in (1990).
1277–1287 (2013). patients with REM sleep behavior disorder than 118. Iwanaga, K. et al. Lewy body-t ype degeneration
70. McMillan, C. T. & Wolk, D. A. Presence of cerebral in those with early stage Parkinson’s disease. in cardiac plexus in Parkinson’s and incidental Lewy
amyloid modulates phenotype and pattern of Park. Relat. Disord. 16, 252–255 (2010). body diseases. Neurology 52, 1269–1271 (1999).
neurodegeneration in early Parkinson’s disease. 95. Nagayama, H., Hamamoto, M., Ueda, M., 119. den Hartog Jager, W. A. & Bethlem, J. The distribution
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87, 1112–1122 Nagashima, J. & Katayama, Y. Reliability of MIBG of Lewy bodies in the central and autonomic nervous
(2016). myocardial scintigraphy in the diagnosis of Parkinson’s systems in idiopathic paralysis agitans. J. Neurol.
71. Fairfoul, G. et al. Alpha-s ynuclein RT-Q uIC in the CSF disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 76, Neurosurg. Psychiatry 23, 283–290 (1960).
of patients with alpha-s ynucleinopathies. Ann. Clin. 249–251 (2005). 120. Halliday, G. M., Blumbergs, P. C., Cotton, R. G. H.,
Transl. Neurol. 3, 812–818 (2016). 96. Horsager, J. et al. Brain-f irst vs. body-f irst Parkinson’s Blessing, W. W. & Geffen, L. B. Loss of brainstem
72. Rossi, M. et al. Ultrasensitive RT-Q uIC assay with high disease – a multi-m odal imaging case-c ontrol study. serotonin- and substance P-c ontaining neurons
sensitivity and specificity for Lewy body-a ssociated Brain 143, 3077–3088 (2020). in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Res. 510, 104–107
synucleinopathies. Acta Neuropathol. 140, 49–62 Case–control multimodal imaging study in PD (1990).
(2020). patients with and without RBD showing that patients 121. Jellinger, K. Quantitative changes in some subcortical
73. Antelmi, E., Donadio, V., Incensi, A., Plazzi, G. with RBD are characterized by initial colonic and nuclei in aging, Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s
& Liguori, R. Skin nerve phosphorylated α- synuclein cardiac signal loss (‘body-f irst’), whereas patients disease. Neurobiol. Aging 8, 556–561 (1987).
deposits in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder. without RBD show primary putaminal signal loss 122. Wakabayashi, K. & Takahashi, H. Neuropathology
Neurology 88, 2128–2131 (2017). (‘brain- first’). of autonomic nervous system in Parkinson’s disease.
74. Vilas, D. et al. Assessment of α- synuclein in 97. Iranzo, A. et al. Neurodegenerative disease status Eur. Neurol. 38, 2–7 (1997).
submandibular glands of patients with idiopathic and post-m ortem pathology in idiopathic rapid-e ye- 123. Forno, L. S. Neuropathology of Parkinson’s disease.
rapid-e ye-movement sleep behaviour disorder: a case- movement sleep behaviour disorder: an observational J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 55, 259–272 (1996).
control study. Lancet Neurol. 15, 708–718 (2016). cohort study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 443–453 (2013). 124. Markesbery, W. R., Jicha, G. A., Liu, H. & Schmitt, F. A.
75. Iranzo, A. et al. α-S ynuclein aggregates in labial 98. Iranzo, A. et al. Characterization of patients with Lewy body pathology in normal elderly subjects.
salivary glands of idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep longstanding idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 68, 816–822 (2009).
behavior disorder. Sleep 41, zsy101 (2018). Neurology 89, 242–248 (2017). 125. Braak, H., de Vos, R. A. I., Bohl, J. & Del Tredici, K.
76. Sprenger, F. S. et al. Enteric nervous system α- synuclein 99. Yao, C. et al. Longstanding disease-f ree survival Gastric α-s ynuclein immunoreactive inclusions in
immunoreactivity in idiopathic REM sleep behavior in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: is Meissner’s and Auerbach’s plexuses in cases staged
disorder. Neurology 85, 1761–1768 (2015). neurodegeneration inevitable? Park. Relat. Disord. for Parkinson’s disease-r elated brain pathology.
77. Lim, E. W. et al. Amyloid-β and Parkinson’s disease. 54, 99–102 (2018). Neurosci. Lett. 396, 67–72 (2006).
J. Neurol. 266, 2605–2619 (2019). 100. Dugger, B. N. et al. Rapid eye movement sleep 126. Desplats, P. et al. Inclusion formation and neuronal
78. Lawton, M. et al. Blood biomarkers with Parkinson’s behavior disorder and subtypes in autopsy-c onfirmed cell death through neuron-t o-neuron transmission
disease clusters and prognosis: the Oxford Discovery dementia with Lewy bodies. Mov. Disord. 27, 72–78 of α- synuclein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106,
Cohort. Mov. Disord. 35, 279–287 (2020). (2012). 13010–13015 (2009).
360 | June 2021 | volume 17 www.nature.com/nrneurol
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

Reviews
127. Hansen, C. et al. α-S ynuclein propagates from mouse 139. Ulusoy, A. et al. Brain-t o-stomach transfer 151. Miyake, Y. et al. LRRK2 Gly2385Arg polymorphism,
brain to grafted dopaminergic neurons and seeds of α-s ynuclein via vagal preganglionic projections. cigarette smoking, and risk of sporadic Parkinson’s
aggregation in cultured human cells. J. Clin. Invest. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 381–393 (2017). disease: a case-c ontrol study in Japan. J. Neurol. Sci.
121, 715–725 (2011). 140. McKeith, I. G. et al. Diagnosis and management of 297, 15–18 (2010).
128. Hawkes, C. H., Tredici, K. D. & Braak, H. Parkinson’s dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology 89, 88–100 152. Goldman, S. M. et al. Head injury, alpha-s ynuclein
disease: a dual-h it hypothesis. Neuropathol. Appl. (2017). Rep1, and Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 71,
Neurobiol. 33, 599–614 (2007). 141. Kosaka, K. Latest concept of Lewy body disease. 40–48 (2012).
129. Svensson, E. et al. Vagotomy and subsequent risk of Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 68, 391–394 (2014). 153. Lee, P. C. et al. Examining the reserve hypothesis in
Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 78, 522–529 142. Nakashima-Y asuda, H. et al. Co-m orbidity of TDP-43 Parkinson’s disease: a longitudinal study. Mov. Disord.
(2015). proteinopathy in Lewy body related diseases. Acta 34, 1663–1671 (2019).
130. Pan-M ontojo, F. et al. Environmental toxins trigger Neuropathol. 114, 221–229 (2007).
PD-l ike progression via increased alpha-s ynuclein 143. Popescu, A., Lippa, C. F., Lee, V. M. Y. & Acknowledgements
release from enteric neurons in mice. Sci. Rep. 2, 898 Trojanowski, J. Q. Lewy bodies in the amygdala: We gratefully acknowledge the excellent cooperation with
(2012). increase of α-s ynuclein aggregates in neurodegenerative many experts in the design and update of the Movement
131. Noorian, A. R. et al. Alpha-s ynuclein transgenic mice diseases with tau-b ased inclusions. Arch. Neurol. 61, Disorder Society criteria for prodromal PD, which are an
display age-r elated slowing of gastrointestinal motility 1915–1919 (2004). essential basis of this article.
associated with transgene expression in the vagal 144. Clinton, L. K., Blurton-J ones, M., Myczek, K.,
system. Neurobiol. Dis. 48, 9–19 (2012). Trojanowski, J. Q. & LaFerla, F. M. Synergistic Author contributions
132. Lubomski, M. et al. Parkinson’s disease and the interactions between Aβ, tau, and α- synuclein: All authors researched evidence for the article, made substan-
gastrointestinal microbiome. J. Neurol. 267, acceleration of neuropathology and cognitive decline. tial contributions to discussion of the content, contributed to
2507–2523 (2019). J. Neurosci. 30, 7281–7289 (2010). writing of the article and reviewed and edited the manuscript
133. Burke, R. E., Dauer, W. T. & Vonsattel, J. P. G. A critical 145. Poulopoulos, M., Levy, O. A. & Alcalay, R. N. before submission.
evaluation of the Braak staging scheme for Parkinson’s The neuropathology of genetic Parkinson’s disease.
disease. Ann. Neurol. 64, 485–491 (2008). Mov. Disord. 27, 831–842 (2012).
Competing interests
134. Jellinger, K. A. A critical evaluation of current staging 146. Engelender, S. & Isacson, O. The threshold theory
The authors declare no competing interests.
of α-s ynuclein pathology in Lewy body disorders. for Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci. 40, 4–14
Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1792, (2017).
730–740 (2009). 147. Bassil, F. et al. Amyloid-B eta (Aβ) plaques promote Peer review information
135. Jellinger, K. A. Is Braak staging valid for all types of seeding and spreading of alpha-s ynuclein and tau Nature Reviews Neurology thanks C. Caig, A. Espay and the
Parkinson’s disease? J. Neural Transm. 126, 423–431 in a mouse model of Lewy body disorders with Aβ other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
(2019). pathology. Neuron 105, 260–275 (2020). review of this work.
136. Halliday, G., Hely, M., Reid, W. & Morris, J. The 148. Hall, S. et al. Longitudinal measurements of
progression of pathology in longitudinally followed cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease. Publisher’s note
patients with Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Mov. Disord. 31, 898–905 (2016). Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
115, 409–415 (2008). 149. Lehtonen, Š., Sonninen, T. M., Wojciechowski, S., claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
137. Ulusoy, A. et al. Caudo-r ostral brain spreading Goldsteins, G. & Koistinaho, J. Dysfunction of cellular
of α-s ynuclein through vagal connections. EMBO proteostasis in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurosci. Supplementary information
Mol. Med. 5, 1119–1127 (2013). 13, 457 (2019). The online version contains supplementary material available
138. Arotcarena, M.-L. et al. Bidirectional gut-t o-brain 150. Elbaz, A. et al. CYP2D6 polymorphism, pesticide at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-021-00486-9.
and brain-t o-gut propagation of synucleinopathy in exposure, and Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 55,
non- human primates. Brain 143, 1462–1475 (2020). 430–434 (2004). © Springer Nature Limited 2021
n ATuRe RevIewS | Neurology volume 17 | June 2021 | 361
0123456789();:

---PAGE BREAK---

