Nature Vol. 298 29 July 1982 467
The trained circling rat: a model ~
10
for inducing unilateral
; f
caudate dopamine metabolism
·ea 8
Bryan K. Yamamoto & Curt R. Freed ...
Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Box C237, University P "' . 6
of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA C...i
I
;:s
1- 4
Despite considerable knowledge about brain dopamine in drug
induced and pathological states, the dynamic relationship of
dopamine to voluntary motor behaviour is not estabtished. In 2 j
an eftort to produce selective, lateralized changes in brain
dopamine metabolism associated with movement, we have now
0
developed an animal model in which normal rats were trained 3 5 7
to circle for a sucrose/water reward. Turning direction was
Training session
randomly assigned. The effect of circling on dopamine metabol
Fig. 1 Acquisition of trained turning behaviour in six animals.
ism was studied by killing animals during the reinforcement
Water-deprived animals were trained daily using a sucrose/water
period and measuring caudate dopamine and dihydroxyphenyl·
reward. Animal performance plateaued after 7 days of reinforce-
acetic acid (DOP AC) concentrations in both sides of brain.
ment training.
Prior to turning, caudate dopamine and DOP AC levels were
the same bilaterally. By contrast, animals ldUed after 20 min appropriate direction was reinforced. When this response was
of circling showed a 67% increase in dopamine and a 46% acquired, a 180° turn was then necessary for reward. Sub
increase in DOPAC concentrations in the caudate contralateral sequently, 270° and 360° turns were required. Rats learned this
to the turning direction while the ipsilateral caudate showed procedure within 20-30 min and the first training session con
no concentration changes. Such a rapid, massive unilateral tinued until each animal had performed 100 turns. Training
increase in caudate dopamine metabolism suggests that was conducted daily for 7 days according to a continuous
dopamine neurones in contralateral caudate are selectively
a
activated during circling behaviour. This model should be useful
for further study of the relationships between neurotransmitter
·ce 12
activity, regional brain physiology and voluntary movement, ...
"' 8
without the need for drugs or brain lesions. Q.
Circling behaviour is an extensively studied area of the ."c..'
neurosciences and has recently been reviewed1 • Studies have 1 ;: - s 4
used lesions, stimulation of various brain areas and pharmacol
0
ogical manipulations in an effort to understand the neural basis
b
of motor behaviour. Most workers have focused on the 100
dopamine-containing nigrostriatal system. Ungerstedt showed
that animals with unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the
"..."
80
substantia nigra would circle in the direction of the lesioned ~
0
side after amphetamine administration, presumably because of E 60
enhanced dopamine release in the caudate on the intact side2 .=.
In this lesion model, a receptor agonist such as apomorphine
•
" ec 40
'----
~
~ --------------'01
will produce turns in the direction opposite to the lesions, ... Ipsilateral to turns
possibly because of the development of denervation supersensi Q. 20
0
tivity on the lesioned side. Glick and co-workers have noted 0
that some rats preferentially turn to one side spontaneously
and that this turning behaviour can be increased by 10 c Contralateral to turns
amphetamine3 .4. Following amphetamine, these animals show Oil rlf
an increase in dopamine in the caudate contralateral to the 8 ~
~
turning direction. Results from these and other experiments
have suggested that striatal dopamine has a role in circling 0 E 6 1
.=.
behaviour. Because all of these paradigms have used drugs or ~
lesions or animals with natural behavioural asymmetries, these u < 4 Ipsilateral to turns
previous studies do not directly address the relationship D.
0
between dopamine metabolism and movement in the normal 0 2
animal. We have therefore developed a behavioural model to
study caudate dopamine metabolism in animals trained to turn 0 _ ____J
0 10 30 50 70
in an arbitrary direction without the use of drugs or lesions.
Time (min)
Eighteen male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250-350 g
were water deprived for 24 h before training. All rats were Fig. 2 Turning behaviour and caudate dopamine metabolism in
randomly assigned to be trained to turn 360° in the left-hand trained rats. Trained animals were placed in the reinforcement
or right-hand direction. The training apparatus was a 24-cm apparatus attime 0. a, Turning began rapidly after water reinforce·
diameter circular drum with 25-cm vertical walls. The drum ment was started. Data are mean ±s.e.m. for six animals. b, c,
was equipped with a liquid dispenser (Lafayette) calibrated to Caudate dopamine and DOPAC concentrations were measured
by killing six animals at each time point. Values are mean± s.e.m.
deliver 0.05 ml of a 10% w /w sucrose/water per reinforcement.
Contralateral dopamine and DOPAC concentrations are
Following water deprivation, rats were placed in the drum and
significantly elevated compared with ipsilateral concentrations at
sucrose solution was released from the dispenser. All rats 20 min (P < 0.01, both values) and 70 min (P < 0.05, both values)
quickly located the fluid. The training protocol consisted of after starting circling. Concentrations are in nanomol per g wet
rewarding each rat by successive approximations to a full turn weight caudate. Statistics were determined by Student's paired
in the prescribed direction. Initially, a quarter turn in the r-test.
0028-{}836/82/300467--02$01.00 © 1982 Macmillan Journal> Ltd

---PAGE BREAK---

468 Nature Vol. 298 29 July 1982
reinforcement schedule. Figure 1 shows the acquisition curves 1.73±0.21, n = 5, P<0.01 compared with baseline ratio).
for this behaviour. One hundred turns were required during These data are part of a complete study of the kinetics of
the first 3 days of training while 150 complete turns were tyrosine hydroxylase activation in our circling rat model (M.E.
required for the subsequent 4 days of training. During this time, Morgan, B.K.Y. and C.R.F., in preparation).
the only water provided was that received during the training Ours is the first observation of lateralization of brain
session. Ad libitum access to Purina Laboratory Chow was neurotransmitter metabolism during voluntary motor
available in the home cage. This deprivation schedule enabled behaviour. Nieoullon et a/. demonstrated enhanced dopamine
all rats to maintain at least 85% of their original body weight. release in caudate ipsilateral to unilateral sensory stimulation
We found that after turning behaviour was acquired, the in anaesthetized cats9 In addition, their experiments showed
•
animals retained the response for at least 1 month without a reduction in dopamine release from the contralateral caudate.
regular training sessions. Minimal training was required to Glick and co-workers showed relative increases in contralateral
restore the previous maximum turning intensity. After animals caudate dopamine concentration after amphetamine
had learned the turning paradigm, they were killed at different administration to unlesioned animals which showed side prefer
times during circling behaviour and caudate dopamine and ences3, but our experiments are the first evidence that such
DOPA C measured. Rats were killed by decapitation, and left changes occur in normal animals executing an arbitrarily as
and right caudate were dissected and assayed for dopamine and signed behaviour. Furthermore, the time course of the changes
DOPAC by HPLC with electrochemical detection, using tri in dopamine concentration parallel the motor behaviour. Our
chloroacetic acid as the ion-pairing agent according to the experiments do not address the question of the causal role of
method of Freed and Asmus5 • dopamine in movement. Although the maximum increase in
The relationship between turning and dopamine metabolism contralateral dopamine concentration is observed at the time
is presented in Fig. 2. Figure 2a shows the time course of of maximum circling intensity and is reduced as turning sub
turning for animals permitted to follow the full turning protocol. sequently slows, we cannot say whether dopamine has caused
No circling behaviour occurred during the baseline period or is simply the result of the turning behaviour.
before water reinforcement was made available. When the The traditional substantia nigra-lesioned rotating rat model
animals were transferred to the reinforcement apparatus, turn has been useful for investigating nigrostriatal function and as
ing began immediately with high intensity. Turning rate a screening device for potential anti-parkinsonian drugs.
declined after -30 minutes and approached a low frequency However, the trained rat model has an important advantage
plateau by 70 min. Caudate nuclei contralateral and ipsilateral for studying neurotransmitters in the central nervous system.
to the trained circling direction were analysed for dopamine It provides a method for exploring the relationships between
and its major metabolite, DOP AC (see Fig. 2b, c). Dopamine behaviour and dopamine metabolism in the normal, undrugged
and DOPAC concentrations significantly increased in the cau and unlesioned brain. In addition, the trained turning rat may
date contralateral to the trained turning direction at the time be useful for studying laterality in other brain areas linked to
of peak turning intensity. Contralateral concentrations were motor function and to other neurotransmitters such as y
increased both in comparison with baseline values and with aminobutyric acid and acetylcholine.
simultaneous values from the ipsilateral side. After 70 min of Received 21 January; accepted 21 May 1982.
reinforcement, circling had slowed and contralateral dopamine 1. Pycock, C. J. Neuroscience 5, 461-514 (1980).
and DOPA C concentrations declined but were still significantly 2. Ungerstedt, U. Acta physiol. scand. Suppl. 367,69-93 (1971).
3. Glick, S.D .• Jerussi, T. P. & Zimmerberg, B. in Lateralizarion in the Nervous System (ed.
greater than ipsilateral concentrations.
Harnad, S.) 213-249 (Academic, New York, 1977).
Our findings of unilateral increases in both dopamine and 4. Jerussi, T. P. & Glick. S.D. Psychapharmacology 47,249-260 (1976).
DOPA C concentrations imply that both synthesis and turnover 5. Freed, C. R. & Asmus, P. A. J. Neurochem. 32,163-168 (1979).
6. Javoy, F. & Glowinski, J. I. Neurochem. 18, 1305-1311 (1971).
of caudate dopamine are selectively enhanced during voluntary 7. Yamamoto, B. K., Lane, R. F. & Freed, C. R. Life Sci. 30,2115-2162 (1982).
turning. Previous studies of dopamine metabolism in brain of 8. Nagatsu, T., Levitt, M. & Udenfriend, S. Ana/yr. Biochem. 9, 122-126 (1964).
9. Nieoullon, A., Cheramy, A. & Glowinski, J. Nature 266, 375 (1977).
resting animals have suggested that there is a small, readily
releasable high turnover pool of dopamine in the caudate and
a large slow turnover storage pool6 Our results indicate that Brain grafts reverse hypogonadism
.
the trained circling rat is capable of unilaterally increasing total of gonadotropin
caudate dopamine concentration by 67% in 20 min. Although
releasing hormone deficiency
we have not localized this dopamine, such a massive increase
suggests that the entire dopamine pool is involved. Because
D. T. Krieger*, M. J. Perlow*§, M. J. Gibson*,
contralateral caudate DOP AC concentration is also elevated
T. F. Davies*, E. A. Zimmermant, M. Ferint
over the time course of circling, increased dopamine synthesis
is accompanied by increased transmitter turnover. Dopamine & H. M. Charlton*
concentration rose more rapidly than DOP AC concentration *Departments of Medicine and Neurology, Mount Sinai Medical
(67% increase in dopamine versus 46% forDOPAC at 20 min), Center, New York, New York 10029, USA
but at 70 min, as turning subsided, dopamine concentration had t Departments of Neurology and Obstetrics and Gynecology,
fallen to only 20% greater than baseline while DOPAC College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York, New York 10032,
remained 35% increased. As DOPAC is a metabolite of USA
t Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford,
dopamine, this delayed fall-off of DOPAC concentration is
South Parks Road, Oxford OXl 3QZ, UK
expected.
We have obtained further support for asymmetric regulation
Hypogonadism in the mutant hpg mouse is characterized by
of caudate dopamine metabolism in independent experiments.
a deficiency of hypothalamic gonadotropin releasing hormone
Using the trained rat model and the technique of in vivo
(GnRH)1 Affected male mice exhibit immature reproductive
electrochemistry, we have found that contralateral release of •
organs, small abdominal testes and low pituitary and plasma
dopamine is relatively increased during circling7 Furthermore,
• gonadotropin concentrations. Recent studies have demon
we have assayed tyrosine hydroxylase activity at the same time
strated the potential of fetal brain transplants to estabfish func
points reported here using the method of Nagatsu8 at a sub
tional connections with host tissues2 We therefore sought to
saturating concentration of pterin cofactor (0.4 mM 2-amino-4 •
use this approach to correct the hpg deficit. Fetal preoptic area
hydroxy-6-methyltetrahydropterin). Baseline activity was not
(POA) (a site of GnRH production) from unaffected animals
significantly different in the two sides of brain (ratio of activity
of the hpg strain was transplanted into the anterior third ven
contralateral/ipsilateral= 0.84 ± 0.08, n = 5). After 20 min
tricle of adult hpg mice. We report that in such implanted
circling, contralateral caudate tyrosine hydroxylase activity
increased 106% relative to the ipsilateral side (activity ratio §Present address: Neurology Department, Augustana Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.
0028-0836/82/300468-04$01.00 © 1982 Macmillan Journals Ltd

---PAGE BREAK---

