REVIEWS
Dynamin, a membrane-remodelling
GTPase
Shawn M. Ferguson1,2 and Pietro De Camilli1–4
Abstract | Dynamin, the founding member of a family of dynamin-like proteins (DLPs)
implicated in membrane remodelling, has a critical role in endocytic membrane fission
events. The use of complementary approaches, including live-cell imaging, cell-free studies,
X-ray crystallography and genetic studies in mice, has greatly advanced our understanding
of the mechanisms by which dynamin acts, its essential roles in cell physiology and the
specific function of different dynamin isoforms. In addition, several connections between
dynamin and human disease have also emerged, highlighting specific contributions of this
GTPase to the physiology of different tissues.
Endocytosis, the process through which cells internal­ understanding only of how dynamin is recruited and
Synaptic vesicles
Small (~40 nm in diameter) ize portions of their plasma membrane along with then acts at fission sites for clathrin­mediated endo­
vesicles within neuronal extracellular material, is fundamentally important in cytosis. In this Review, we discuss how complementary
presynaptic terminals that cell physiology. Endocytosis counterbalances the con­ experimental approaches have greatly increased our
store and release
tinuous delivery of new membrane to the cell surface understanding of dynamin’s action. We also highlight
neurotransmitter.
by exocytosis, regulates the abundance of proteins in how this information has been further enhanced by
the plasma membrane, controls the signalling output new insights into the function and mechanistic action
of receptors, mediates cellular uptake of nutrients and of dynamin­like proteins (DLPs).
is also exploited by pathogens to enter cells. To sup­
port these various functions, multiple molecularly and The discovery of dynamin
morphologically distinct forms of endocytosis, both Dynamin was originally identified as a GTPase that
constitutiv e and regulated, operate in all cells1–4. co­purified with brain microtubules6,9. Its role in endo­
Generation of an endocytic vesicle requires the cytosis was revealed only subsequently, when the muta­
recruitment of various proteins from the cytosol that tions responsible for the temperature­sensitive paralytic
orchestrate the bending inward of the plasma membrane phenotype of Drosophila melanogaster shibire mutants
to form a deeply invaginated bud and subsequently were mapped to the dynamin gene7,8. In these mutants,
promote its fission. One such protein that directly par­ paralysis results from the neuronal activity­dependent
1Department of Cell Biology,
ticipates in the fission reaction is the GTPase dynamin, depletion of synaptic vesicles, which is accompanied by
Yale University School of
Medicine.2Program in the founding member of a family of GTPases that have the accumulation of arrested ‘collared’ endocytic pits
Cellular Neuroscience, diverse roles in membrane­remodelling events through­ at the presynaptic plasma membrane5. Subsequent studie s
Neurodegeneration and out the cell (FIG. 1). The role of dynamin in endocytosis revealed that similar collared pits formed at mamma­
Repair, Yale University School
has now been investigated for more than 20 years5–8. lian presynaptic plasma membranes upon exposure to
of Medicine.3Kavli Institute
for Neuroscience, A considerable amount of evidence indicates that GTP­γS, a slowly hydrolysable GTP analogue, and that
Yale University School of dynamin assembles into helical polymers at the necks of they contained oligomeric assemblies of dynamin10. The
Medicine.4Howard Hughes budding vesicles and that its GTP hydrolysis­dependent assembly of helical dynamin polymers either in solution11
Medical Institute,
conformational change promotes fission of the under­ or on membrane templates was additionally reconstituted
Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, lying tubular membrane to generate a free endocytic with the purified protein11 (FIG. 2e). Further investigations
Connecticut 06510, USA. vesicle (FIG. 2). However, several aspects of its func­ in non­neuronal cells showed that dynamin is a general
e‑mails: tion, its precise mechanisms of action and the specific component of clathrin­coated endocytic pits and that its
shawn.ferguson@yale.edu; roles of multiple dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells GTPase activity is important for endocytosis: dynamin
pietro.decamilli@yale.edu
have remained elusive. Furthermore, although multiple mutants with impaired GTP binding (such as the com­
doi:10.1038/nrm3266
Published online dynamin­dependent and dynamin­independent endo­ monly used Lys44Ala mutant) and/or hydrolysis cycles
11 January 2012 cytic pathways have been described, we have a good have dominant­negative effects on endocytosis12–15.
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 75
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Membrane ruffles Endosymbiotic origin and that additional studies are required to fully address the
Actin
Dynamin of mitochondria issue of redundancy between dynamin isoforms.
Ancient bacterium
Actin pedestal Dynamin A family of DLPs
E C Clathrin- Nucleus The dynamins are the founding members of a family
E P Endosomal coated pit of GTPases known as the DLPs, the members of which
actin comet Caveolae participate in membrane remodelling (FIG. 1; TABLE 1)
ER
and share basic features of domain organization (BOX 1).
DRP1 They also have similar catalytic mechanisms and modes
Atlastin of action that differ from those of the RAS superfamily
Nucleus
of regulatory GTPases. The G domains of DLPs undergo
Mitochondrion OPA1
nucleotide­dependent dimerization and dimer­dependent
GTP hydrolysis29–32. G domain dimerization reciprocally
Mitofusin
induces structural rearrangements in the catalytic centre
of the partner DLP, which stimulate GTP hydrolysis33.
Podosomes and invadopodia Clathrin-coated pit
In contrast to small regulatory GTPases of the RAS family,
Figure 1 | Sites of action of dynamin and DLPs in a mammalian cell. Dynamin is DLP family GTPases have low affinity for nucleotides and
localized at sites of endocytosis. It is also found atN aacttuinre m Reesvhiwewosrk |s M noulcelecuatlaerd C beyl tlh Bei ology
do not require separate GAPs and GEFs (GTPase­activating
actin-related protein 2/3 (ARP2/3) complex, such as membrane ruffles, podosomes and
proteins and guanine nucleotide exchange factors), as
invadopodia, and at actin pedestals induced by pathogenic bacteria (such as
they load spontaneously with GTP and have intrinsic
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC)). Other dynamin-like proteins (DLPs), including
mechanisms for stabilizing the transition state during
atlastin, dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1), optic atrophy 1 homologue (OPA1) and
mitofusin, localize to sites of intracellular membrane fission and fusion in the endoplasmic GTP hydrolysis29. In the case of dynamin, GTP hydroly­
reticulum (ER), mitochondria and peroxisomes (not shown). The possible endosymbiotic sis is thought to be supported by a sodium or potassium
origin of mitochondria and peroxisomes (that is, their formation by the endocytosis of ion within the active site30. In other DLPs, divergent
an ancient bacterium) may explain the role of a DLP in the fission of these organelles. mechanisms are used to stabilize the transition state.
However, the lack of a requirement for additional GAP
proteins, and the importance of G domain dimerizatio n,
Three dynamin isoforms in mammals is conserve d within the DLP family.
Mammalian genomes contain three dynamin genes16. Furthermore, whereas the GTP binding and hydrolysis
The proteins encoded by these genes share the same cycle of regulatory GTPases mediates the recruitment and
domain organization and 80% overall homology, but release of effector proteins, the cellular function of DLPs
they have distinct expression patterns. Dynamin 1 is is tightly coupled to the dimerization of their G domains
selectively expressed at high levels in neurons and is gen­ and, at least for some of them, to their polymeriza­
SRC homology 3 domain erally not present in non­neuronal tissues17,18, although tion29,31,32,34,35. The conformational changes produced by
(SH3 domain). A domain that it can be detected in many cultured cell lines19,20. GTP binding and hydrolysis in the G domain of DLPs
mediates protein–protein Dynamin 2 is expressed ubiquitously17,21. Dynamin 3 is are transduced into a movement relative to adjacent
interactions and binds
found predominantly in the brain (at much lower levels domains36–38 that, when propagated along the polymer,
Pro-containing short amino
acid motifs. This domain is than dynamin 1) and testis, and at lower levels in some is expected to produce a force on membranes31,32. Thus,
frequently found in proteins tissues, such as the lung16,17,22. Dynamin diversity is com­ for dynamin, the cycle of GTP loading and hydrolysis
involved in signalling, pounded by the existence of multiple splice variants for is intimately coupled to its membrane­fission activity
endocytosis and actin
each of the three dynamins16. (FIG. 2d). This explains why mutations in dynamin that are
regulation.
Invertebrates, such as Caenorhabditis elegans and designed to lock it into a GTP­bound state do not result
GAPs and GEFs D. melanogaster, possess only a single dynamin gene7,23. So, in the constitutive activation of endocytosis15, in contrast
(GTPase-activating proteins the existence of three dynamin genes in mammals could to the persistent activity exhibited by regulatory GTPases
and guanine nucleotide
in principle reflect differences between the ‘housekeeping’ that harbour equivalent mutations.
exchange factors). GAPs
role of dynamin in clathrin­mediated endocytosis, which is
promote GTP hydrolysis
by GTPases, whereas GEFs mediated by dynamin 2, and the specialized forms of endo­ Domain organization of dynamin
displace the GDP generated by cytosis in cells that additionally express dynamin 1 and/or On the basis of its primary sequence, dynamin, a cyto­
the reaction, thus allowing the dynamin 3. In addition, this triplication of the dynamin solic protein, has typically been described as comprisin g:
next cycle of GTP binding and
gene during evolution may be partly explained by a need an amino­terminal G domain; a ‘middle’ or ‘stalk’
hydrolysis to proceed.
to fine­tune overall dynamin levels in specific tissues. region; a pleckstrin homology domain (PH domain); a
Pleckstrin homology Different dynamin isoforms have some unique protein– GTPase effector domain (GED), so called because of
domain protein interactions24–27. However, most of the differences its interactions with the G domain39; and a Pro­rich
(PH domain). These domains
between isoforms are quantitative rather than qualitative; c arboxy­termina l region, typically referred to as the Pro­
often contain binding sites
these include affinities for SRC homology 3 domain (SH3 rich domain (PRD)16 (FIG. 2a). More recently, informa­
for phosphoinositides (most
typically phosphatidylinositol- domain)­containing proteins22, rates of GTPase activity, tion about the structures of dynamin and DLPs30,34,36,37,
4-phosphate and phosphatidyl- oligomerization efficiency and lipid­binding properties28. including the crystal structure of dimers of nearly full­
inositol-4,5-bisphosphate) and Nonetheless, a recent report stating that differences in the length dynamin (lacking only the PRD)31,32 have allowed
thus help target proteins to
lipid­binding characteristics of dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 for a modified definition of dynamin domains that bette r
specific membranes. However,
they can also function in cause robust differences in their membrane­fission activ­ reflects the predicted three­dimensional hairpin­like
protein–protein interactions. ity28 indicates that this remains an area of active research folding of the full­length protein (FIG. 2a,b).
76 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
kceN kceN kceN
REVIEWS
a Dynamin 1 The G domain and BSE. The G domain sits on a helical
GTPase Middle PH GED PRD bundle, known as the bundle signalling element (BSE)30
or neck40, which is formed by three helices derived from
G domain ‘Stalk’ ‘Foot’ ‘Stalk’ PRD sequences at the N­terminal and C­terminal sides of the
1 301 520 627 751 864 G domain and from the C­terminal region of the GED,
respectively (FIG. 2). Consistent with the idea that this
region of the GED is in close physical proximity with,
and is functionally linked to, the G domain, a screen for
suppressor mutations of a mutation in the G domain
of D. melanogaster dynamin identified a mutation
within the GED C terminus41. The BSE is followed by
a stalk, which is composed of helices from the middle
domain and the N­terminal region of the GED30–33, and
a PH domain42, which forms the vertex or ‘foot’ of the
stalk hairpin and binds membranes. The PRD, which
is expected to be unfolded, emerges at the boundary
b G domain GTP e
Neck between the BSE and the G domain, most likely project­
1 ing away from the membrane, where it might interact
2 2
‘Stalk’ 90° with other proteins.
‘Foot’
3
Dimerization through the stalk. The stalk of dynamin
dimerizes in a cross­like fashion (FIG. 2a,b) to yield a
c
dynamin dimer in which the two G domains are oriented
in opposite directions30–33 (FIG. 2b). This dimer is the basic
dynamin unit and is different from the additional dimer­
ization interface that is generated by the interaction of two
G domains (FIG. 2b,c), which is discussed below.
Phospholipid association through the PH domain. The
PH domain binds acidic phospholipids in the cytosolic
leaflet of the plasma membrane, and phosphatidyl­
d inositol­4,5­bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P) in particular,
2
via a positively charged surface at the foot of the dynamin
hairpin42,43. PH­domain mutants that impair phospho­
inositide binding exert dominant­negative effects on
clathrin­mediated endocytosis44,45. The binding between
Polymerization of GTP-dependent dimerization of Membrane fission the isolated dynamin PH domain and phosphoinositides
dynamin helix G domains, GTP hydrolysis and is of very modest affinity (>1 mM), but this membrane
resulting membrane constriction interaction is strengthened by charge­dependent asso­
Figure 2 | Structure of dynamin and putative mechanism of dynamin-mediated ciation with other negatively charged phospholipids
membrane fission. a | Linear representation of the domain organization of dynamin and by avidity afforded by dynamin polymerization43–46.
based on its three-dimensional structure, as revealed by crystallographic studies A hydrophobic loop emerging from the PH domain
(numbers indicate amino acid position within the primary sequence of the human may promote membrane interactions and may also have
dynamin 1 xa splice variant). Regions that belong to the same folded module are shown
curvatur e­generatin g or ­sensing properties28,47.
in the same colour. The crystal structure of a dynamin dimer is shown below (minus the
PRDs, which are thought to be unfolded), and is colour-coded to match the linear
Coordinating dynamin function through the PRD. The
representation (created with PyMOL (Schrödinger); Protein Data Bank code 3SNH31).
PRD contains an array of PXXP amino acid motifs, which
b | Schematic representation of dynamin dimers and of helical dynamin polymers around
a tubular template in two different orientations (with 90° rotation between them). The interact with many SH3 domain­containing proteins
colour-coding of the domains matches the colours in part a (minus the PRDs, which are (see Supplementary information S1 (table)) to localize
thought to project out of the polymerized helix). The approximate location of the bound dynamin at endocytic sites and coordinate dynamin’s
nucleotide is highlighted in yellow (small circles). Dynamin polymerization occurs as a function with these other factors during endocytosis48–51.
result of interactions between the ‘stalks’ of dynamin monomers (interface 2) and between Accordingly, dynamin lacking the PRD cannot rescue
stalk dimers (interfaces 1 and 3). The GTP-dependent dimerization of G domains between endocytic defects in dynamin­knockout fibroblasts19.
adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix (highlighted by yellow stars in the longitudinal view
The PRD–SH3 interactions are typically of moderate
of the helix), is thought to promote assembly-stimulated GTPase activity, resulting in
affinity, but the presence of multiple SH3­binding motifs
membrane constriction and ultimately fission. c | Proposed GTP hydrolysis-dependent
in the PRD and multiple SH3 domain­containing pro­
lever-like movement of dynamin’s neck (the bundle signalling element), relative to the
teins at endocytic sites, as well as the polymeric state of
G domain. d | Schematic view of these key steps leading to dynamin-mediated membrane
fission. e | Cryo-electron microscopy image showing a helical polymer of purified dynamin these proteins, results in a significant avidity effect, which
that has driven the formation of a tubule from a liposome. GED, GTPase effector domain; enhances the ability of such interactions to concentrate
PH, pleckstrin homology; PRD, Pro-rich domain. Image in part e courtesy of A. Frost, dynamin. At least some interactions of the dynamin PRD
University of Utah, USA, and V. Unger, Northwestern University, USA. are regulate d by phosphorylation48.
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 77
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Table 1 | Diverse roles for DLPs at membrane interfaces
DLPs Organisms Subcellular localization and Functions Refs
sites of action
Classical dynamins Animals Endocytic sites in the plasma Endocytic membrane fission; regulation of –
membrane; ARP2/3-containing ARP2/3-dependent actin dynamics
actin meshworks
DRP1 Animals Mitochondrial outer membrane; Mitochondrial fission; peroxisome division 159–162
peroxisomes
Mitofusin Animals Mitochondrial outer membrane Mitochondrial fusion 159–162
OPA1 Animals Mitochondrial inner membrane Mitochondrial fusion 159–162,
188
Atlastin Animals ER Fusion of ER membranes 167,168,
189
Myxovirus resistance Animals ER Antiviral 169,190
proteins
Guanylate-binding proteins Animals Intracellular vesicles Defence against viral and bacterial pathogens 170,191,192
Phragmoplastin Plants Cell plate Cell division 171
ARC5, ADL Plants Chloroplast Chloroplast fission 193,194
Vps1 Fungi Endosomes; plasma membrane? Membrane fission 98,195
Bacterial DLP Cyanobacteria Integral membrane protein Membrane fusion? 40
ARC5, ACCUMULATION AND REPLICATION OF CHLOROPLASTS 5; ARP2/3, actin-related protein 2/3; DLPs, dynamin-like proteins; DRP1, dynamin-related
protein 1; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; OPA1, optic atrophy 1 homologue; Vps1, vacuolar protein sorting-associated 1.
Coordinating polymerization and activity and minimal systems based on purified dynamin and
Purified dynamin spontaneously polymerizes into artificial lipid bilayers55,56,61–63. Models derived from these
rings and helices when incubated in solutions with low experiments have suggested that, when dynamin has
ionic strength11 or in the presence of narrow negatively polymerized around the neck of an endocytic bud (or a
charged tubular templates (such as membrane tubules, tubular membrane template in vitro), its GTP hydrolysis­
microtubules or actin bundles)6,52–54. It can also tubu­ dependent structural reorganization triggers constriction
late membrane bilayers under appropriate conditions by (in the ‘twistase’ and/or ‘constrictase’ models) or stretch­
forming a continuous membrane coat around them10,55–57. ing (in the ‘poppase’ model) to promote membrane fission
Dynamin polymerization resulting from the apposition (FIG. 2b). Importantly, cell­free studies have shown that
of dimers via stalk–tip interactions (FIG. 2b; interfaces 1 purified dynamin alone can cut synthetic lipid tubules
and 3) occurs an angle that determines the diameter of the in the presence of GTP55,56,61,63. Thus, although other fac­
ring31,32. The tetrameric form of dynamin, which can be tors may assist the action of dynamin in vivo, dynamin is
abundant in solution58, may be an intermediate in higher­ sufficien t to mediate membrane fission.
order assembly34,38. Thus, the stalks form the core of the Recent crystallographic and cryo­electron micros­
ring, whereas the BSE and G domains of each dimer pro­ copy (cryo­EM) studies of dynamin and DLPs have
ject towards the adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix31,32 offered important new clues about how dynamin
(FIG. 2b). It follows that G domain dimerization, which is works. First, the demonstration that dynamin belongs
critical for GTP hydrolysis and for dynamin function, can to the superfamily of G proteins activated by nucleotide­
only occur across adjacent rungs (FIG. 2b), which explains dependent dimerization (GADs)29 strongly argues
the robust stimulation of dynamin’s GTPase activity upon against the possibility that GTP­bound dynamin may
polymerization54. A similar overall domain organization function by recruiting another effector39. Second, as
and mode of polymerization is predicted to be shared by G domain dimerization is critical for GTPase activ­
all DLPs implicated in membrane fission59. However, the ity29,30,59,61,64 and requires interactions between adjacent
module that binds the membrane in these other proteins rungs of the dynamin helix30 (FIG. 2b), dynamin’s action
is divergent from dynamin, and the PRD is replaced by requires, at a minimum, a polymer that wraps around a
sequences with different binding properties. Such diver­ membrane template to connect to the next rung. Third,
gence probably reflects the different mechanisms that studies of dynamin and of the DLP atlastin suggest that
recruit different DLPs to membranes and may speak GTP hydrolysis by a G domain dimer leads to a promi­
against a key role of the PRD and the PH domain in the nent lever­like movement of the adjacent domain, the
mechanics of fission. BSE in the case of dynamin36–38 (FIG. 2c). Such a move­
ment could constrict the dynamin helix when propa­
Membrane fission by the dynamin helix gated along its subunits. As this movement is triggered
The mechanisms by which dynamin drives membrane fis­ by the interaction of G domains on adjacent rungs of
sion have been the subject of intense debate and have been a helix, it could produce a coordinated rotational slid­
analysed in living cells12,15,44,54, broken­cell preparations10,60 ing of one rung on the next, which is consistent with
78 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
dynamin­mediated membrane fission. For example, the
Box 1 | A family of DLPs
relative contributions of G domain dimerization versus
Dynamins are the founding members of a family of GTPases known as the dynamin-like subsequent GTP hydrolysis in the constriction and fis­
proteins (DLPs), the members of which share basic features of domain organization and
sion of membranes remain undefined. Furthermore, GTP
roles in membrane remodelling (FIG. 1). Within this family, some proteins act similarly to
hydrolysis may not only produce a power stroke but also
dynamin in mediating membrane fission. For example, dynamin-related protein 1
contribute to membrane destabilization by inducing helix
(DRP1) is important for the fission of mitochondria and peroxisomes159–162. Others are
disassembly.
more distant members and mediate homotypic membrane fusion159–162. These include
mitofusin, which controls the fusion of mitochondrial outer membranes, optic atrophy 1
homologue (OPA1), which is important for inner mitochondrial membrane fusion, and Additional factors cooperating in fission. Although
atlastin, which mediates the fusion of endoplasmic reticulum membranes159–162,167,168. dynamin alone can constrict and cut lipid tubules, the con­
Also included in this family, on the basis of their structure and assembly properties, striction of the dynamin ring in vivo is likely to be assisted
are the antiviral, interferon-inducible myxovirus resistance proteins9,169 and or regulated by other factors to achieve fission (FIG. 3).
guanylate-binding proteins170, whose precise functions remain unknown. Plant DLPs These include: membrane tension generated by actin,
control membrane traffic during cell plate formation in cytokinesis171 and mediate either via its polymerization or via myosin motors55,61,67,68;
chloroplast division172,173. A bacterial DLP implicated in membrane remodelling has also
a heterogeneous distribution of lipids on the two sides of
been identified and structurally characterized40,172. Additionally, although differing
the constriction, contributing to line tensio n69; enzymatic
from the DLPs in that they are ATPases rather than GTPases, the EPS15 homology
degradation of PtdIns(4,5)P, leading to catastrophic dis­
domain-containing (EHD) proteins share structural similarities and are also implicated 2
in membrane remodelling174. sociation of dynamin and other endocytic factors after
Mutations in DLPs other than dynamin, and more specifically in DLPs that affect GTP hydrolysis70; and the partial destabil ization of the
mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum dynamics, have been identified as causes of bilayer by neighbouring lipid­bindin g proteins, such
inherited diseases. These include mutations in OPA1 (inducing optic atrophy type 1)175, as proteins containing Bin–amphiphysin–Rvs (BAR)
mitofusin 2 (leading to Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2A)176, atlastin (resulting domains71. The potential role of BAR domain­containing
in hereditary spastic paraplegia)177 and DRP1 (generating lethal perinatal defects in proteins has acquired interest with the realization that the
mitochondria and peroxisome fission)178.
GTPase activity of dynamin involves interactions between
dynamin rungs because the intercalation of BAR domains
between rungs could hinder such an interaction71–73 and
the reported twisting of dynamin­coated tubules during thus potentially inhibit dynamin’s action. Cryo­EM
GTP hydrolysis55. However, in principle, such movement studies aimed at elucidating the precise organizational
could also simply constrict the tubule by producing a relationship between dynamin rings and BAR domain
structural change in the ring without any rotation32. proteins should help to determine the contribution that
Surprisingly, however, if a dynamin helix has been this makes.
assembled in the absence of hydrolysable GTP, sub­
sequent GTP loading and hydrolysis does not necessarily A key component of clathrin-coated pits
trigger fission, possibly because a long dynamin coat can Dynamin may contribute to multiple forms of endo­
function as a stabilizing scaffold55,61,62. In cell­free systems, cytosis, but its action is best understood in the context
efficient fission of lipid tubules occurs optimally under of clathrin­mediated endocytosis12–14,17,19,20,22,67,74 (FIG. 3).
conditions in which dynamin polymerization occurs in During the formation of endocytic buds (FIG. 3), a
the presence of GTP, allowing rapid coupling between subse t of scaffold proteins (such as FCH domain only 1
dynamin assembly, GTP hydrolysis and polymer disas­ (FCHO1), epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15
sembly56,61,63. Under these conditions, fission is proposed (EPS15) and intersectin)67,75 and clathrin adaptors (for
to result from the membrane destabilization that is pre­ example, the adaptor protein 2 (AP2) complex, AP180
dicted to occur when the constricted ring disassembles and its homologue clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid
(FIG. 2d). A long, continuous dynamin helix may be less leukaemia (CALM; also known as PICALM) and epsin)
efficient in promoting fission because it lacks a focal are first recruited to the PtdIns(4,5)P­rich plasma mem­
2
point for constriction or has less efficient subunit disso­ brane, coincident with the binding of some of these pro­
ciation. In fact, taking into consideration bulk cytoplas­ teins to endocytic sorting motifs of integral membrane
mic GTP concentrations of ~2 mM versus the binding proteins1,76. Such components cluster cargo, induce
affinity of dynamin for GTP (K = ~1 μM)65, dynamin membrane curvature and also have actin­nucleating
d
oligomerizing into helices should be in a predominantly properties1,76. The coat subsequently grows through the
GTP­bound state and be poised to hydrolyse GTP and assembly of the clathrin lattice, which, through positive
disassemble quickly when the G domains of one turn can feedback, recruits additional cargo adaptors and endo­
dimerize with the G domains of the next turn. Under cytic factors1,76,77. Dynamin also slowly accumulates
some physiological conditions, local regulation of GTP around the growing pit67. Deep invagination of the bud
levels probably contributes to proper dynamin function, and formation of a narrow neck, which is often assisted
as mutations in the nucleoside diphosphate kinase gene, by a burst of actin polymerization19,78, involves the
Line tension which helps maintain such levels, make synapses more recruitment of BAR domain­containing proteins, sever al
A force that acts to minimize sensitive to dynamin mutations66. of which bind dynamin as well as the PtdIns(4,5)P
2
the length of the energetically Although there have been important advances in phosphatase synaptojanin19,72,73,79 (BOX 2; FIG. 3; see
unfavourable interface
our understanding of the structure of dynamin, we have Supplementary information S1 (table)). It is at this
between adjacent membrane
domains of different much to learn about how conformational changes pro­ point that dynamin rapidly accumulates at bud necks to
composition. duced by the GTP hydrolysis cycle of dynamin relate to mediat e fission67,80 (FIG. 3).
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 79
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

b
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
tip
ta
ecnadnubA
REVIEWS
a + Dynamin high­avidity affinity matrix71; see Supplementary infor­
mation S1 (table)); and actin, which can directly bind
dynamin85 (FIG. 3). The coinciding accumulation of BAR
proteins, actin and dynamin at late stages of endocyto­
sis67,80, which is consistent with feed­forward mechanisms,
Dynamin Endophilin is particularly striking (FIG. 3b).
The sequence of events underlying clathrin­mediated
Clathrin- endocytosis is evolutionarily conserved, as this process
coated pit shows mechanistic similarity to endocytosis at actin
N-WASP,
ARP2/3, actin – Dynamin patches in yeast86,87. Surprisingly, however, there are
mixed reports as to whether the closest yeast homologue
of dynamin, vacuolar protein sorting­associated 1 (Vps1),
Membrane fission does88,89 or does not86,90 participate in actin patch endo­
Dynamin cytosis, questioning how essential dynamin is for clathrin­
Clathrin coat mediated endocytosis. It is possible that unique properties
Actin of the yeast plasma membrane, for example tension and/ or
Endophilin the presence of a cell wall, explain this difference91.
Dynamin in other endocytic pathways
Endocytosis can also occur without clathrin, and dynamin
has been implicated in some clathrin­independent endo­
cytic pathways (FIG. 1). For example, a role for dynamin
–80 –60 –40 –20 0 20 40 60 80 in caveolin­dependent internalization has been sug­
t (s)
gested, and both dynamin and actin were transiently
Figure 3 | Dynamin and clathrin-mediated endocytosis. a | The putative sequence
detected at caveolae, coincident with their fission from
of events in the action of clathrin adaptors, actin, Bin–amphiphysin–Rvs (BAR)
the plasma membrane92,93. However, the dynamics and
domain-containing proteins and dynamin at clathrin-coated endocytic pits, as revealed
by studies of cells that lack dynamin (dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double-knockout function of dynamin at caveolae remain largely undefined.
fibroblasts)19. Lack of dynamin results in an arrest of the endocytic reaction at the stage Surprisingly, the absence of dynamin is accompanied by
of deeply invaginated pits and in the actin-dependent elongation of their BAR a loss of caveolae and of their core component caveolin 1,
domain-containing protein-coated tubular necks (lower-right electron microscopy (EM) rather than by the increase in caveolae abundance that
micrograph). When actin is depolymerized (for example, through latrunculin B might be expected if dynamin were required for their fis­
treatment), clathrin-coated buds collapse to Ω-shaped pits with short, wide necks sion19. Thus, it is not yet clear whether dynamin has a key
(upper-left EM micrograph). The fluorescence micrograph shows tubulated endocytic
role during the endocytic fission of caveolae.
clathrin-coated pits in dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double-knockout fibroblasts, as
With respect to clathrin­ and caveolin­independent
revealed by live-cell imaging of the BAR domain-containing protein endophilin 2,
endocytic pathways, evidence for a role of dynamin is,
which was labelled with green fluorescent protein (tubular neck), and of clathrin
in many cases, primarily dependent on approaches using
light chain, which was labelled with red fluorescent protein. b | Schematic timeline
showing the accumulation of endocytic proteins at endocytic pits. The zero time dominant­negative mutants (which may exert indirect
represents the fission reaction, as determined by the loss of accessibility of the bud effects) or pharmacological inhibition with drugs (which
lumen to the extracellular medium (based on data from REF. 67). Note that the role may have off­target or non­physiological effects; see
of actin may be non-essential under some conditions78,100. ARP2/3, actin-related Supplementary information S2 (box)). Thus, definitive
protein 2/3; N-WASP, neural Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein. EM and fluorescence answers as to how dynamin affects such pathways will
micrographs in part a are reproduced, with permission, from REF. 19 © (2009) Elsevier. require a combination of methods and should include
loss­of­function studies. As robust bulk endocytosis still
occurs in fibroblasts lacking dynamin19 and in the pres­
The enrichment of dynamin at clathrin­coated endo­ ence of dominant­negative dynamin mutants12, dynamin
cytic pits has been extensively demonstrated by fluo­ cannot have a universal role in endocytic vesicle fission.
rescence microscopy12,51,67,80, including super­resolution
methods60 and EM10,81. Furthermore, live imaging of cells Roles in intracellular budding
expressing fluorescent dynamin shows that dynamin lev­ Vesicle budding, and thus membrane fission, occurs at
els at the pits are low during early stages of clathrin­coated multiple points throughout the secretory and endocytic
pit maturation (FIG. 3), most likely reflecting low­affinity pathways. Although dynamin does not affect most of
interactions with other endocytic factors, and rise mark­ these events, several experimental approaches have sug­
edly during later stages — reflecting polymerization at the gested that it might contribute to the fission of clathrin­
bud neck — to reach a peak that coincides with mem­ coated vesicles that bud from the trans­Golgi network
Caveolae
brane fission67,80,82 (FIG. 3b). Factors that cooperatively, but (TGN)94, as well as of other vesicles that bud from either
Small flask-shaped
invaginations of the plasma redundantly, regulate dynamin assembly here include: the Golgi complex or endosomes20,95–97. The yeast dynamin
membrane that are involved in PtdIns(4,5)P and other acidic phospholipids present in homologue Vps1 has also been implicated in retrograde
2
the endocytic uptake of various the plasma membrane83,84; the tubular membrane tem­ traffic between endosomes and the Golgi complex98.
cell surface molecules and
plate at the bud neck53; proteins containing dynamin­ However, there was no obvious accumulation of clathrin­
some viruses, in signalling and
in the regulation of plasma binding SH3 domains (primarily BAR domain­containing coated pits at the TGN of fibroblasts lacking dynamin19,
membrane tension. proteins72,73, whose polymerization forms a powerful suggesting that dynamin is not universally required for
80 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
mediate phagocytosis103), invadopodia104, podosomes105,
Box 2 | Sensing and generating membrane curvature
actin comets106,107 and the actin pedestals that can be
Some proteins that function at the membrane interface bind preferentially to curved associated with bacterial cell entry108 (FIG. 1). At these
membranes. This can result from: the intrinsic curvature of the membrane-binding
sites, dynamin is not restricted to the membrane inter­
surface of these proteins; their propensity to oligomerize into curved scaffolds; or the
face but is present in the actin meshwork itself (FIG. 1).
presence of amphipathic helices whose partial insertion into the bilayer is facilitated by
This co localization is consistent with the PRD­mediated
the loose packing of phospholipids at sites of high positive curvature. The same proteins
binding of dynamin to numerous actin­regulating pro­
can also force the membrane to curve and thus induce, propagate or stabilize bilayer
curvature71,179–182. The ability of these proteins to function primarily as curvature sensors teins, including proteins that contain CDC42­interacting
or curvature inducers depends on various factors, such as regulated affinity for the or ­regulating domains (summarized in Supplementary
membrane (through changes in the phosphorylation, folding state or surface charge of information S1 (table)). Indeed, dynamin can bundle
the membrane) and local concentration179. Dynamin has important curvature-sensing around actin filaments assembled in the presence of its
and -generating properties53, owing to its polymerization into rings11 and to the partner cortactin, which can simultaneously bind filamen­
presence of a hydrophobic loop emerging from its pleckstrin homology (PH) domain47. tous actin (F­actin)52,102. The stalk region of dynamin itself
BAR domains. Many proteins that bind dynamin’s Pro-rich domain (PRD) via an SRC can also bind F­actin directly85. This raises the question of
homology 3 (SH3) domain also contain Bin–amphiphysin–Rvs (BAR) domains, which whether dynamin can directly influence actin dynamics
are protein modules with curvature-generating and -sensing properties71,79,183 (see and may have a role in actin function independen t of
Supplementary information S1 (table)). BAR domains comprise amino acid sequences endocytosis. However, as membrane remodelling is the
that fold into coiled-coils and dimerize into elongated, curved structures that are
shared property of dynamin and other DLPs, and thus is
optimally suited to bind the negatively charged cytosolic leaflet of the plasma
likely to be the most critical function of dynamin, links
membrane71,182,184,185. The presence of amphipathic helices or lipid-binding modules
between dynamin and actin may predominantly reflect
that flank the BAR domains and their propensity to polymerize further enhance the
its role in membrane remodelling during endocytosis.
bilayer-moulding properties of these proteins71. In BAR domain-containing proteins
that bind dynamin, the bilayer-binding surface is optimally suited to bind endocytic Studies in yeast emphasize the critical role of actin in
intermediates71 because it is typically concave (with shallow curvature in FCH-BAR endocytosis, further supporting this possibility86,90,109.
(F-BAR) domains, such as syndapin, formin-binding protein 17 (FBP17), transducer The interaction of dynamin with actin and its regu­
of CDC42-dependent actin assembly 1 (TOCA1) and CDC42-interacting protein 4 latory proteins may help position dynamin at endocytic
(CIP4)71,185,186, and narrow curvature in classic BAR domains, such as endophilin, sites (FIGS 1,3). For example, a role of actin in directing the
amphiphysin, sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) and SNX18 (REF. 71)). BAR domain-containing localization of dynamin at endocytic sites is supported by
proteins are proposed to coordinate the progressive acquisition of bilayer curvature at
studies of mammalian cells that lack dynamin, which have
the necks of coated pits with the recruitment of factors that drive constriction, fission
shown that F­actin acts upstream of dynamin at clathrin
and immediate post-fission events (FIG. 3). Dynamin binding to the SH3 domain of BAR
coated pits19 (FIG. 3). Actin may also generate membrane
or F-BAR domain-containing proteins also relieves autoinhibitory intramolecular
tension at the neck of endocytic buds, thus synergizing
interactions that limit the membrane-binding activity of the BAR or F-BAR domain186,187.
with dynamin during fission. Conversely, perturbation
of dynamin function in living cells (by the expression of
clathrin­mediated budding. It is also important to con­ mutant dynamin or by pharmacological inhibition)
sider that some defects observed at non­endocytic sites can perturb actin dynamics85,101,106,107,110,111. However, in
when dynamin is inhibited may arise indirectly through cells that lack dynamin, stress fibres do not seem to be
clathrin sequestration at the cell surface, perturbation of affected19. The most obvious change observed in these cells
membrane traffic, effects on signalling pathways and/or is the accumulation of ARP2/3­dependent actin mesh­
cytoskeletal dynamics. works around the necks of arrested endocytic clathrin ­
coated pits19 (FIG. 3). There is also evidence of alterations to
Dynamin and the cytoskeleton other ARP2/3­dependent actin­based structures in these
Dynamin interacts both directly and indirectly with cells, such as circular membrane ruffles and invadopodia
the cytoskeleton. The relationship between these inter­ and/or podosomes104,105,111 (S.M.F., O. Destaing, R. Baron
Lamellipodia actions and the endocytic function of dynamin is one of and P.D.C., unpublished observations). However, it is dif­
Broad, thin plasma membrane
the most interesting and poorly understood aspects ficult to discriminate between direct and indirect effects
protrusions that are driven by
of dynamin biology. in these experiments, as disrupted endocytosis may alter
actin polymerization and are
critical for cell motility and signalling pathways (see below).
for some forms of bulk Intimate links with actin. A major property of dynamin, The recent crystallographic studies of dynamin30–33
endocytosis. and one that is likely to be fundamentally important to its have raised new questions about potential non­endocytic
action, is its link to the actin cytoskeleton. A link between effects of dynamin on actin dynamics. The helical organi­
Podosomes
Focal sites of dynamic actin dynamin and actin at endocytic sites is not surprising zation of dynamin polymers at the bud neck appears to be
polymerization at the plasma and is consistent with the importance of actin for many optimally suited to allow an interaction in trans between
membrane that are found in endocytic events, including at least a subset of clathrin­ dynamin G domains to promote GTP hydrolysis (FIG. 2b).
motile cells at sites of cell– mediated endocytic processes19,67,68,99,100. However, However, purified dynamin can also polymerize into
matrix interaction, where they
immuno fluorescence studies and live­cell analyses show helices around actin bundles and microtubules. It will be
promote the local degradation
of the matrix. These structures that dynamin also colocalizes prominently with actin important to determine whether such a transient helica l
are critical for supporting meshworks that are nucleated by the actin regulators arrangement occurs physiologically at non­endocytic
cell migration through the neural Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (N­WASP)– sites; these structures would be expected to produce
extracellular matrix and for
WAVE and actin­related protein 2/3 (ARP2/3) at several detectable bursts of fluorescence in cells expressing green
bone resorption by osteoclasts.
Similar to invadopodia, which other sites, including lamellipodia101, membrane ruffle s fluorescent protein­labelled dynamin but have not yet
are found in invasive cells. (including circular dorsal ruffles102 and ruffles that been observed.
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 81
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Possible ties to microtubule dynamics? Although dynamin findings suggest that dynamin may limit ACK signalling
interacts with microtubules in vitro6, dynamin only by promoting clathrin­coated pit turnover.
shows strong colocalization with microtubules in cells
when its PH domain is mutated112. Moreover, disrup­ Unique roles for dynamin isoforms
tion of dynamin function or lack of dynamin both result Gene­knockout studies in mice17,19,22 and the cells
in a robust increase in the level of acetylated tubulin19,112, derived from them have provided numerous insights
a modification associated with stable microtubules. into dynamin function and the specific roles of the three
This effect may be related either directly to the ability of dynamin isoforms. Dynamin 2­knockout mice die early
dynamin to bind microtubules or to altered microtubule in embryonic development, which is consistent with the
dynamics that result from alterations in the structure ubiquitous expression and housekeeping functions of this
and functional state of the cell cortex (for example, the isoform19. Conditional dynamin 2­knockout cells showed
great abundance of endocytic clathrin coated pits and of transient defects in clathrin­mediated endocytosi s.
a robust accumulation of actin around them), where the However, the severity of this phenotype was reduced by
stability of the plus end of microtubules is regulated. dynamin 1 upregulation, demonstrating that these two
isoforms have at least some overlapping functions19,20.
Control of cytokinesis. Dynamin 2 concentrates at sites A double conditional knockout of dynamin 1 and
of abscission and was implicated in the completion of dynamin 2 in mice19, and an analysis of fibroblasts
cytokinesis113–115. Given the role of microtubules as well derived from these mice, confirmed that dynamin has
as membrane traffic during abscission116–118, and the con­ an essential role in clathrin­mediated endocytosis but
nections that dynamin has to each of these pathways, the also yielded unexpected results. Surprisingly, dynamin 1
precise role of dynamin in cytokinesis remains unclear. and dynamin 2 double­knockout fibroblasts survived for
Interestingly, dynamin 2 is phosphorylated during mitosis several weeks in culture without proliferation19, which
by cyclin­dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), and its dephospho­ precluded analysis of the proposed role for dynamin in
rylation by calcineurin at these sites is required during cytokinesis128. Most strikingly, dynamin 1 and dynamin 2
cytokinesis114. This phosphorylation cycle of dynamin 2 double­knockout cells accumulated endocytic clathrin­
is reminiscent of the phosphorylation cycle of dynamin 1 coated pits connected to the plasma membrane by long
in nerve terminals, which is mediated by CDK5 and tubular necks19 (FIG. 3), similarly to the phenotype pro­
calcineurin119 (FIG. 4). The broad use of this signalling duced by some dynamin mutants81 and to that observed
pathway may be indicative of its fundamental impor­ in cells recovering from a temperature­induced block in
tance. Indeed, this extends to CDK1 phosphorylation endocytosis129. These tubular necks, which were highly
of dynamin­related protein 1 (DRP1), which promotes dynamic, had an outer diameter of approximately 36 nm
mitocho ndrial fission during mitosis120. (REF. 19), which is consistent with that of tubules coated
by BAR domain­containing proteins71. Accordingly,
Endocytosis and signalling fluorescent imaging analysis shows that various BAR
As clathrin­mediated endocytosis is the major pathway of domain­containing proteins, such as endophilin, sort­
receptor internalization, dynamin regulates the abundance ing nexin 9 (SNX9), amphiphysin and tuba are present
on the plasma membrane, and thus the signalling output, in these tubules19,127, as are N­WASP, components of the
of diverse receptors, including growth factor receptors, ARP2/3 complex, other actin regulatory proteins and
G protein­coupled receptors (GPCRs), ionotropic neuro­ F­actin19 (FIG. 3a).
transmitter receptors, ion channels, cell adhesion proteins Thus, although dynamin may modulate early stages of
and signalling proteins, such as Notch121–124. This was first clathrin­coated pit formation, it is essential only for a late
emphasized by the major neurogenic developmental step of clathrin­mediated endocytosis, when membrane
effects of the D. melanogaster shibire mutation125, which fission occurs. Moreover, the key function of dynamin is
arise from the inhibition of Notch signalling (a phenotype to terminate the formation of a deeply invaginated pit,
that is also observed when dynamin is lost124). In addi­ which is orchestrated by other factors. These studies have
tion to these indirect effects of dynamin on signalling, also helped elucidate the sequence of events that occur
dynamin also interacts directly with a large collection of upstream of dynamin, by allowing otherwise transient
signalling proteins (see Supplementary information S1 intermediates to accumulate (FIG. 3a). They showed that
(table)). These interactions may help coordinate signal­ the actin cytoskeleton has a primary role in elongating the
ling from receptors internalized by clathrin­coated pits tubular necks of the coated pits and that the recruitment
with the dynamics of the pits and resulting vesicles, and of BAR domain­containing proteins on tubules, which is
they probably reflect an inseparable partnership between mediated to some extent by their curvature­sensing prop­
endocytosis and signalling. The broader effects of endo­ erties, may help shape, stabilize and elongate the tubules
cytosis on signalling have been extensively studied and in tight coordination with actin.
Actin comets
reviewed elsewhere3,121,126.
‘Tails’ of filamentous actin
nucleated by endosomes or A full and systematic assessment of how dynamin Dynamin and the nervous system
intracellular pathogens that affects signalling has yet to be performed. However, Endocytosis has a housekeeping role in neurons, as in
propel the endosome or dynamin loss significantly increases phosphorylation other cells. However, endocytosis, and clathrin­mediated
pathogen through the
and activation of the Tyr kinase activated CDC42 kinase endocytosis in particular, also has a specialized role in
cytoplasm through the
force produced by actin (ACK), which interacts with clathrin and other factors nerve terminals, mediating the local recycling of synaptic
polymerization. implicated in clathrin­mediated endocytosis127. These vesicle membranes after exocytosis130 (FIG. 4a). Consistent
82 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
a Wild type Double knockout Figure 4 | Dynamin participates in synaptic vesicle
recycling at neuronal synapses. a | From electron
Presynaptic
microscopy analysis, wild-type synapses (left) are
characterized by an abundance of synaptic vesicles and
very few clathrin-coated pits or clathrin-coated vesicles,
Vesicle which is consistent with the transient nature of
Clathrin clathrin-coated structures even during intense synaptic
activity. At synapses that lack the great majority of their
Dynamin
normal dynamin content (for example, from dynamin 1-
Actin
knockout neurons or, even more strikingly, from dynamin 1
and dynamin 3 double-knockout neurons; right) there is a
depletion of synaptic vesicles and a striking accumulation
Postsynaptic of uniformly sized clathrin-coated pits, which bud from
long invaginations of the plasma membrane17,22,145.
A small increase in the abundance of clathrin-coated
b c
pits is also observed postsynaptically, where pits are
more heterogeneous in size. b | Representative electron
micrograph of a presynaptic terminal from a dynamin 1-
knockout neuron. Presynaptic vesicle clusters at two
synaptic junctions are very small (regions defined by
dashed lines), whereas clathrin-coated vesicular structures
are highly abundant and occupy the bulk of the terminal.
As shown by electron tomography (see part c), all such
structures are coated pits, although in this thin section
(~60 nm) their tubular ‘stalks’ can only be seen in few cases,
and their connection with the plasma membrane cannot
be appreciated17,145. c | Partial electron tomography
reconstruction from dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double-
knockout nerve terminals, showing a long tubular plasma
membrane invagination studded with numerous individual
clathrin-coated pits. The arrow indicates the opening of
this tubular structure at the peripheral presynaptic plasma
membrane. d | In resting synapses, the Pro-rich domain
(PRD) of dynamin 1 is phosphorylated, preventing
association with syndapin. Upon stimulation and increased
d Resting synapse Stimulated synapse cytosolic calcium concentration, the protein phosphatase
Dynamin 1 calcineurin, which directly binds a dynamin 1 splice variant
G domain Calcineurin Calcineurin (xb), dephosphorylates dynamin 1, allowing its interaction
‘Stalk’ ‘Foot’‘Stalk’ PRD with syndapin. This regulated interaction is thought to
Neck P P
Ca2+
Syndapin promote synaptic vesicle endocytosis at times of elevated
P
P neuronal activity.
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
with this, disruption of synaptic transmission is the most Dynamin 1 and nervous system function. Dynamin 1 is
dramatic and rapid effect produced by the temperature­ present at high concentrations in the nervous syste m, is
sensitive inactivation of dynamin in D. melanogaster5,7,8. concentrated at synapses and shows markedly increased
Furthermore, perturbing dynamin impairs synaptic levels during synaptogenesis17,18. Additionally, dynamin 1
vesicle recycling, and thus neuronal communication, in and several other endocytic proteins, collectively called
severa l experimental models5,17,22,23,131–136. ‘dephosphins’ (REFS 139–141), are constitutively phos­
The fact that all three dynamins are expressed in neu­ phorylated in resting synapses. This dynamin phospho­
rons, with both dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 being expressed rylation depends, at least in part, on CDK5 (REF. 119),
primarily in the nervous system, raises questions about the and, upon nerve stimulation, dynamin is rapidly dephos­
specific roles that each of the three dynamins has here17,21. phorylated by the calcium­ and calmodulin­dependent
On the basis of knockout studies, only dynamin 2 is phosphatase calcineurin139 (FIG. 4d); this is predicted to
essential for the development of the nervous system19. Its facilitate dynamin inter actions with endocytic proteins
conditional knockout using the Cre–loxP system in early to promote endocytosis48. The direct interaction of a
neuronal progenitors137, prior to the onset of expression dynamin 1 splice variant (the ‘b’ C­terminal variant)
of dynamin 1 and dynamin 3, drastically impairs brain with calcineurin, through a PXIXIT­like calcineurin­
develop ment (S.M.F. and P.D.C., unpublished observa­ binding motif (PRITIS), further emphasizes the poten­
tions). However, conditional deletion of dynamin 2 in tial physiological importance of this calcium­dependent
neurons at an early postnatal stage138 does not affect mouse dephosphorylation reaction for synaptic function24,25
viability or cause any discernible neurological phenotype (S. Giovedi, S.M.F. and P.D.C., unpublished observa­
(S.M.F. and P.D.C., unpublished observations). This tions). On the basis of these considerations, dynamin 1
indicates that, when dynamin 1 and/or dynamin 3 are was expected to be essential for synaptic vesicle
expressed, they can replace the function of dynamin 2. endocytosis.
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 83
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Surprisingly, dynamin 1 is dispensable for basic functions dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double­knockout neurons
of the nervous system17. However, dynamin 1­knockout (Y. Wu, S.M.F. and P.D.C., unpublished observations).
mice rapidly develop a severe neurological phenotype, Overall, the results of these knockout studies in
fail to thrive and die within two weeks of birth17. Thus, mice demonstrate that even the combined absence of
dynamin 1 is not unique among the three dynamins in its dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 does not abolish synaptic
ability to support synaptic vesicle recycling. However, the vesicle recycling. It is most likely that dynamin 2 is suf­
massive increase in dynamin 1 expression during the first ficient to support synaptic vesicle endocytosis, albeit at
postnatal weeks is critical to sustain the increase in syn­ a slower rate. This conclusion is supported by the ability
aptic activity that occurs as the nervous system matures. of dynamin 2 overexpression to, at least partially, rescue
Consistent with this, direct measurements of endocytic synaptic vesicle recycling defects in dynamin 1­knockou t
rates at the calyx of Held synapse in the mouse brain stem neurons17. However, the additional occurrence of
show that the endocytic rate in dynamin 1­knockout mice dynamin­independent synaptic vesicle recycling cannot
is normal after small stimuli but rapidly saturates and fails be excluded. These findings support a model wherein
to scale with exocytosis as stimulus strength increases136. the occurrence of two neuronally enriched dynamin iso­
forms (dynamin 1 and dynamin 3) and the extremely high
Dynamin 3 at the synapse. Dynamin 3 was pro­ level s of one of them (dynamin 1) are primarily needed
posed to have a specific postsynaptic role, forming not to support a specific form of endocytosis, either
special ized endocytic sites that locally recycle AMPA presynaptically or postsynaptically, but to allow clathrin­
(α­amino­3­hydroxy­5­methyl­4­isoxazole propionic mediated endocytosis to function over a very broad range
acid) receptors in dendritic spines142. Consistent with this, of neuronal activities. Nonetheless, unique properties of
dynamin 3 binds the ENA–VASP­homology 1 (EVH1) dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 (and their splice variants) may
domain of the postsynaptic protein Homer through fine­tune their functions in neurons.
a PXXF motif that is not present in dynamin 1 and
dynamin 2, and this property appeared consistent with Dynamin links to human disease
the reported strong localization of dynamin 3 to dendritic Roles of abnormal dynamin function in genetic disease
spines27. However, this dendritic enrichment of dynamin 3 have begun to emerge. Whereas mutations in dynamin 2
was not confirmed by another study, which instead show links to tissue­specific diseases, mutations in
emphasized an overlapping role with dynamin 1 presyn­ dynamin 1 specifically affect the nervous system.
Calyx of Held
A large synapse within the aptically22. Thus, it is unclear whether any one dynamin
mammalian auditory brainstem isoform shows preferential enrichment or function within Dynamin 2 and tissue-specific diseases. Multiple unique
that is suitable (in mice the postsynaptic compartment, although strong evidence missense mutations, or short deletions, within the middle,
and rats) for presynaptic
indicates that the dynamins play an important part in the PH and stalk domains of dynamin 2 have been identified
measurement of membrane
capacitance and thus for the endocytosis of neurotransmitter receptors143,144. in patients with two autosomal­dominant genetic con­
detection of synaptic vesicle Dynamin 3­knockout mice do not show any obvious ditions, intermediate Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease147 and
exocytosis and endocytosis pathological phenotype22. By contrast, dynamin 1 and centro nuclear myopathy148. Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease is
on a millisecond timescale.
dynamin 3 double­knockout mice have a more severe a peripheral neuropathy that is characterized by muscular
phenotype than dynamin 1 single­knockout mice22. They weakness of the extremities and defects in neuronal axon
Dendritic spines
Small (~1 μm), spine-like, develop normally in utero but, although they maintain a conduction. Centronuclear myopathy is a group of con­
actin-rich protrusions of limited degree of synaptic transmission, they die within genital diseases characterized by muscle weakness. The
neuronal dendrites that several hours after birth. This result supports a partially dominant mode in which these disorders are inherited
function as postsynaptic
overlapping function of the two neuronally enriched supports the idea that the mutant dynamin gains a toxic
sites for excitatory
neurotransmission. They are dynamins in synaptic transmission. function (see Supplementary information S2 (box)).
closely opposed to presynaptic How perturbed dynamin 2 function results in these
sites of neurotransmitter Synaptic transmission in dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 conditions is unclear. There is no clear correlatio n
release and are enriched in
double-knockout mice. Electrophysiological recordings between the diseases and the mutation sites in the
neurotransmitter receptors.
from cultured dynamin 1 single­knockout neurons and dynamin structure, making mechanistic interpretations
Charcot–Marie–Tooth dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double­knockout neurons con­ difficult. It is interesting to note, however, that mutations
disease firmed that synaptic transmission can still occur in the in the PH domain of dynamin 2 in patients with Charcot–
A peripheral nervous system absence of these neuronal dynamins, although the ability Marie–Tooth disease are more frequently located in the
dysfunction that is
to release neurotransmitter, and to sustain release upon N­terminal portion of the domain, whereas mutations in
characterized by slow action
potential conduction owing sustained stimulation, is strongly reduced17,22. Likewise, patients with centronuclear myopathy are more frequently
to defects in either the these mutants show a delay in compensatory endo cytosis located in the C­terminal portion of the dynamin 2 PH
myelin sheath, which insulates in response to a stimulus17,22. The main ultrastructural domain149. Structural analysis shows that, although
neuronal axons, or the
defects observed are a reduced number of synaptic vesicles d isease­linked mutations in the PH and stalk domains
axons themselves.
and a massive accumulation of endocytic clathrin­coated are distant within the primary sequence of dynamin, they
Centronuclear myopathy pits located along deep invaginations of the plasma mem­ actually cluster at an interface between these two domains
A group of skeletal muscle brane17,22,145 (FIG. 4a,b). Dynamin 1 has been implicated in and so can potentially influence dynamin oligomeriza­
diseases that result in muscle the bulk endocytosis that helps to recover synaptic vesicle tion31. It additionally remains unknown why altering the
weakness and which are
membrane in response to strong stimuli146. However, a function of dynamin 2 affects certain tissues so selectively.
characterized by the abnormal
central location of nuclei within form of bulk endocytosis still occurs in response to mas­ Mutations in amphiphysin 2, a major binding partner of
muscle fibres. sive stimulation in both dynamin 1­knockout136,145 and dynamin in brain and muscle tissues, can also give rise
84 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
to an autosomal­recessive form of centronuclear myo­ mediate membrane fission (such as dynamin and DRP1)
pathy150. The muscle­specific isoform of amphiphysin 2 and those that mediate membrane fusion (such as atlastin,
is expressed at very high levels and affects muscle func­ optic atrophy 1 homologue (OPA1) and mitofusin) are
tion151, raising the possibility that muscle pathology in intriguing and unexpected because they suggest analogies
these centronuclear myopathies involves an interaction between the mechanisms that mediate these seemingly
between dynamin and amphiphysin 2. opposite membrane­remodelling processes. Elucidating
the basis of these similarities will be important.
A role for dynamin 1 in epilepsy? So far, no human diseas e Likewise, it will be interesting to determine why DLPs
has been mapped to the dynamin 1 or dynamin 3 genes. are needed for only a subset of membrane­fissio n reactions.
Nonetheless, given the prominent expression and func­ Other GTPases have been implicated in some membran e­
tions of these proteins in neurons, mutations that produce budding reactions that do not involve dynamin or other
neurological phenotypes are likely to occur. Supporting DLPs: for example, the ADP­ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1)
this possibility, a spontaneous mouse mutation — creatin g GTPase affects coatome r complex I (COPI)­dependent
the fitful mutant mouse — that causes seizures and budding from the Golgi complex and the secretion­
hearin g impairment maps to the dynamin 1 gene152. This associated RAS­related 1 (SAR1) GTPase that regulates
missense mutation (Ala408Tyr) occurs in an alternatively COPII­dependent budding from the endoplasmic reticu­
spliced region within the middle domain of dynamin 1 lum158. However, both ARF1 and SAR1 are classic regu­
and may affect its oligomerization. Electrophysiological latory GTPases that function by recruiting downstream
recordings from neurons of these mice demonstrated effectors, indicating that they use a fundamentally differ­
defects in GABA (γ­aminobutyric acid)­ergic neurotrans­ ent mechanism to that of dynamin. The two intracellular
mission in response to prolonged stimulation152, a defect fission reactions besides endocytosis that clearly require
that is similar to that of dynamin 1­knockout mice17,145. DLPs are the fission of mitochondria159–162 and the fission
Thus, subtle perturbations of dynamin 1 function that of chloroplasts (in plants). The endo symbiotic origin of
are otherwise compatible with life can enhance suscept­ these organelles implies that their outer membrane is
ibility to seizure, and dynamin 1 should be considered as ancestrally derived from the plasma membrane, possi­
a candidate gene in idiopathic cases of human epilepsy. It bly explaining why the fission of their outer membrane
is of further intere st that knockout mice for mutations in requires a dynamin (FIG. 1).
any of three dynamin­binding proteins, amphiphysin153, Other exciting areas that need to be explored include
syndapin (also known as PACSIN)154 and endophilin155, possible non­endocytic functions of dynamin, particu­
also have seizures. Additionally, mutations in human larly those involving the cytoskeleton (and the actin
synapsin 1, another protein that has been implicated cytoskeleton in particular). The possibility that dynamin
in synaptic vesicl e recycling, have been identified in could be a target for cancer therapy, because of its role
patients with epilepsy156. It is most likely that impairing in either cytokinesis114 or cell migration and tissue inva­
synaptic vesicle recycling lowers the threshold for seizure sion163, deserves consideration. Interestingly, the invasive
through greater effects on inhibitory neurons that have activity of pancreatic ductal carcinoma was associated
a high rate of synapti c vesicle turnover and thus a high with elevated dynamin 2 expression163. Are the poten­
endocytic demand. tial non­endocytic actions of dynamin mediated by its
Another spontaneous animal model with impaired polymerization in a manner that is analogous to that at the
dynamin 1 function is exercise­induced collapse, a reces­ neck of clathrin­coated pits? Structural studies indicate
sive condition that has been observed in dogs157. These that helical polymerization of dynamin around tubular
otherwise healthy animals display acute and severe templates30–33 is optimally suited to promoting G domain
muscl e weakness resulting in a life­threatening collapse dimerization and thus GTP hydrolysis. However, perhaps
in response to intense exercise or excitement. The under­ other structural configurations are possible.
lying missense mutation, Arg256Leu, is located within the It can be anticipated that the range of known genetic
dynamin 1 G domain. The functional consequence of this diseases resulting directly from mutations in dynamin
mutation on GTPase activity remains uncharacterized. genes will expand. Interestingly, several genes impli­
cated in endocytosis, including CALM and genes that
Conclusions and future questions encode the dynamin­binding proteins CD2­associated
The function of dynamin has been extensively investi­ protein (CD2AP) and amphiphysin 2, have been linked
gated in vitro and in vivo, and this has provided power ful to Alzheimer’s disease by genome­wide association stud­
insights into its cellular roles. Studies of dynamin have ies164,165. Dynamin 2 also mediates the internalization and
also helped identify factors that deform membranes infectivity of bacterial166 and viral pathogens, including
and/ or sense membrane curvature and that participate HIV2,26. In addition to these possibilities, polymorphisms
in the control of membrane fission. Cryo­EM and crys­ within dynamin genes may contribute to susceptibility
tallographic studies of dynamin and other members of to many other specific diseases, as dynamin­dependent
the dynamin superfamily have provided important new endocytosis is implicated in multiple processes that are
insights into how it mediates membrane fission. However, relevant to disease.
major question s remain open. Twenty years after the discovery that dynamin has a
The precise mechanism through which dynamin critical role in endocytosis, the function and mechanisms
achieves fission remains to be elucidated. The similari­ by which this protein acts remain a most important and
ties and evolutionary relationship between DLPs that timely field of investigation.
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 85
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
1. McMahon, H. T. & Boucrot, E. Molecular mechanism 19. Ferguson, S. M. et al. Coordinated actions of actin and 38. Chappie, J. S. et al. A pseudoatomic model of the
and physiological functions of clathrin-mediated BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis-dependent
endocytosis. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 517–533 clathrin-coated pits. Dev. Cell 17, 811–822 (2009). powerstroke. Cell 147, 209–222 (2011).
(2011). Analyses the endocytic intermediates that 39. Sever, S., Muhlberg, A. B. & Schmid, S. L. Impairment
2. Mercer, J., Schelhaas, M. & Helenius, A. Virus entry by accumulate in cells lacking dynamin and indicates of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor-
endocytosis. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 79, 803–833 (2010). a role for F-actin in the recruitment of BAR mediated endocytosis. Nature 398, 481–486 (1999).
3. Scita, G. & Di Fiore, P. P. The endocytic matrix. domain-containing proteins to the tubular neck 40. Low, H. H. & Lowe, J. A bacterial dynamin-like protein.
Nature 463, 464–473 (2010). of clathrin-coated pits. Nature 444, 766–769 (2006).
4. Howes, M. T., Mayor, S. & Parton, R. G. Molecules, 20. Liu, Y. W., Surka, M. C., Schroeter, T., Lukiyanchuk, V. 41. Narayanan, R., Leonard, M., Song, B. D., Schmid, S. L.
mechanisms, and cellular roles of clathrin-independent & Schmid, S. L. Isoform and splice-variant specific & Ramaswami, M. An internal GAP domain negatively
endocytosis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 519–527 functions of dynamin-2 revealed by analysis of regulates presynaptic dynamin in vivo: a two-step
(2010). conditional knock-out cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 19, model for dynamin function. J. Cell Biol. 169, 117–
5. Koenig, J. H. & Ikeda, K. Disappearance and 5347–5359 (2008). 126 (2005).
reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon 21. Cook, T. A., Urrutia, R. & McNiven, M. A. Identification 42. Ferguson, K. M., Lemmon, M. A., Schlessinger, J. &
transmitter release observed under reversible of dynamin 2, an isoform ubiquitously expressed in rat Sigler, P. B. Crystal structure at 2.2 Å resolution of the
blockage of membrane retrieval. J. Neurosci. 9, tissues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 644–648 pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin.
3844–3860 (1989). (1994). Cell 79, 199–209 (1994).
Shows the depletion of synaptic vesicles and 22. Raimondi, A. et al. Overlapping role of dynamin 43. Zheng, J. et al. Identification of the binding site for
accumulation of collared pits in the plasma isoforms in synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Neuron 70, acidic phospholipids on the PH domain of dynamin:
membrane of shibire mutant synapses upon acute 1100–1114 (2011). implications for stimulation of GTPase activity.
stimulation at the non-permissive temperature, and Reports that, although dynamin 3-knockout mice J. Mol. Biol. 255, 14–21 (1996).
thus nicely demonstrates the critical role played by lack a discernible phenotype, analysis of dynamin 1 44. Lee, A., Frank, D. W., Marks, M. S. & Lemmon, M. A.
dynamin in synaptic vesicle recycling. and dynamin 3 double-knockout mice reveals a role Dominant-negative inhibition of receptor-mediated
6. Shpetner, H. S. & Vallee, R. B. Identification of for both dynamins in the recycling of synaptic endocytosis by a dynamin-1 mutant with a defective
dynamin, a novel mechanochemical enzyme that vesicles. pleckstrin homology domain. Curr. Biol. 9, 261–264
mediates interactions between microtubules. Cell 59, 23. Clark, S. G., Shurland, D. L., Meyerowitz, E. M., (1999).
421–432 (1989). Bargmann, C. I. & van der Bliek, A. M. A dynamin 45. Vallis, Y., Wigge, P., Marks, B., Evans, P. R. &
7. van der Bliek, A. M. & Meyerowitz, E. M. Dynamin-like GTPase mutation causes a rapid and reversible McMahon, H. T. Importance of the pleckstrin
protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene temperature-inducible locomotion defect in C. elegans. homology domain of dynamin in clathrin-mediated
associated with vesicular traffic. Nature 351, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 10438–10443 (1997). endocytosis. Curr. Biol. 9, 257–260 (1999).
411–414 (1991). 24. Xue, J. et al. Calcineurin selectively docks with the 46. Bethoney, K. A., King, M. C., Hinshaw, J. E.,
8. Chen, M. S. et al. Multiple forms of dynamin are dynamin Ixb splice variant to regulate activity- Ostap, E. M. & Lemmon, M. A. A possible effector role
encoded by shibire, a Drosophila gene involved in dependent bulk endocytosis. J. Biol. Chem. 286, for the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of dynamin.
endocytosis. Nature 351, 583–586 (1991). 30295–30303 (2011). Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13359–13364
References 7 and 8 identify dynamin as the 25. Bodmer, D., Ascano, M. & Kuruvilla, R. Isoform- (2009).
product of the shibire gene and set the stage for specific dephosphorylation of dynamin1 by calcineurin 47. Ramachandran, R. et al. Membrane insertion of the
studies of dynamin as a critical endocytic protein. couples neurotrophin receptor endocytosis to axonal pleckstrin homology domain variable loop 1 is critical
9. Obar, R. A., Collins, C. A., Hammarback, J. A., growth. Neuron 70, 1085–1099 (2011). for dynamin-catalyzed vesicle scission. Mol. Biol. Cell
Shpetner, H. S. & Vallee, R. B. Molecular cloning of 26. Pizzato, M. et al. Dynamin 2 is required for the 20, 4630–4639 (2009).
the microtubule-associated mechanochemical enzyme enhancement of HIV-1 infectivity by Nef. Proc. Natl 48. Anggono, V. et al. Syndapin I is the phosphorylation-
dynamin reveals homology with a new family of Acad. Sci. USA 104, 6812–6817 (2007). regulated dynamin I partner in synaptic vesicle
GTP-binding proteins. Nature 347, 256–261 (1990). 27. Gray, N. W. et al. Dynamin 3 is a component of the endocytosis. Nature Neurosci. 9, 752–760 (2006).
10. Takei, K., McPherson, P. S., Schmid, S. L. & postsynapse, where it interacts with mGluR5 and Finds that syndapin is the major dynamin-interact-
De Camilli, P. Tubular membrane invaginations coated Homer. Curr. Biol. 13, 510–515 (2003). ing protein in the brain and that this interaction is
by dynamin rings are induced by GTP-γS in nerve 28. Liu, Y. W. et al. Differential curvature sensing and regulated by dynamin phosphorylation, potentially
terminals. Nature 374, 186–190 (1995). generating activities of dynamin isoforms provide coupling this interaction to the activity status of
11. Hinshaw, J. E. & Schmid, S. L. Dynamin self-assembles opportunities for tissue-specific regulation. Proc. Natl neurons.
into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle Acad. Sci. USA 108, E234–E242 (2011). 49. Grabs, D. et al. The SH3 domain of amphiphysin binds
budding. Nature 374, 190–192 (1995). 29. Gasper, R., Meyer, S., Gotthardt, K., Sirajuddin, M. & the proline-rich domain of dynamin at a single site that
References 10 and 11 show the ability of dynamin Wittinghofer, A. It takes two to tango: regulation of defines a new SH3 binding consensus sequence.
to polymerize into helices around membrane G proteins by dimerization. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 13419–13425 (1997).
templates and at the base of clathrin-coated pits, 10, 423–429 (2009). 50. Lundmark, R. & Carlsson, S. R. Regulated membrane
leading to a model wherein the assembly of 30. Chappie, J. S., Acharya, S., Leonard, M., Schmid, S. L. recruitment of dynamin-2 mediated by sorting nexin
dynamin into helical polymers followed by & Dyda, F. G. domain dimerization controls dynamin’s 9. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 42694–42702 (2004).
conformational changes triggered by GTP assembly-stimulated GTPase activity. Nature 465, 51. Shpetner, H. S., Herskovits, J. S. & Vallee, R. B.
hydrolysis could lead to membrane fission. 435–440 (2010). A binding site for SH3 domains targets dynamin to
12. Damke, H., Baba, T., Warnock, D. E. & Schmid, S. L. Reveals, through an analysis of the structure of a coated pits. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 13–16 (1996).
Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks dynamin G domain–GED fusion protein, a need 52. Mooren, O. L., Kotova, T. I., Moore, A. J. & Schafer,
endocytic coated vesicle formation. J. Cell Biol. 127, for dynamin G domain dimerization in mediating D. A. Dynamin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin
915–934 (1994). GTP hydrolysis and proposes that such dimerization filaments. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 23995–24005 (2009).
13. Herskovits, J. S., Burgess, C. C., Obar, R. A. & occurs between rungs of the dynamin helix. 53. Roux, A. et al. Membrane curvature controls dynamin
Vallee, R. B. Effects of mutant rat dynamin on 31. Faelber, K. et al. Crystal structure of nucleotide-free polymerization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
endocytosis. J. Cell Biol. 122, 565–578 (1993). dynamin. Nature 477, 561–566 (2011). 4141–4146 (2010).
14. van der Bliek, A. M. et al. Mutations in human 32. Ford, M. G. J., Jenni, S. & Nunnari, J. The crystal 54. Stowell, M. H., Marks, B., Wigge, P. & McMahon, H. T.
dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle structure of dynamin. Nature 477, 556–560 (2011). Nucleotide-dependent conformational changes in
formation. J. Cell Biol. 122, 553–563 (1993). Describes the first crystal structures of nearly dynamin: evidence for a mechanochemical molecular
Demonstrates that dynamin mutants with impaired full-length dynamin and reveals extensive spring. Nature Cell Biol. 1, 27–32 (1999).
GTP binding and hydrolysis exert interactions that support dynamin assembly 55. Roux, A., Uyhazi, K., Frost, A. & De Camilli, P.
dominant-negative effects on clathrin-mediated into polymeric helices. GTP-dependent twisting of dynamin implicates
endocytosis. 33. Chappie, J. S. et al. A pseudoatomic model of the constriction and tension in membrane fission.
15. Marks, B. et al. GTPase activity of dynamin and dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis-dependent Nature 441, 528–531 (2006).
resulting conformation change are essential for powerstroke. Cell 147, 209–222 (2011). Visualizes dynamin-mediated membrane fission
endocytosis. Nature 410, 231–235 (2001). Comparisons between dynamin G domain–GED in an in vitro assay and reveals contributions by
Shows the importance of GTP hydrolysis by fusion protein structures that mimic the GTP-bound dynamin-mediated membrane constriction and
dynamin in the endocytic actions of dynamin, state and ones that mimic a transition state membrane tension to membrane fission.
arguing against a regulatory GTPase-like function suggest that large conformational changes 56. Sweitzer, S. M. & Hinshaw, J. E. Dynamin undergoes
for dynamin. accompany GTP hydrolysis. a GTP-dependent conformational change causing
16. Cao, H., Garcia, F. & McNiven, M. A. Differential 34. Gao, S. et al. Structural basis of oligomerization in the vesiculation. Cell 93, 1021–1029 (1998).
distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells. stalk region of dynamin-like MxA. Nature 465, 57. Takei, K. et al. Generation of coated intermediates of
Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 2595–2609 (1998). 502–506 (2010). clathrin-mediated endocytosis on protein-free
17. Ferguson, S. M. et al. A selective activity-dependent 35. Ingerman, E. et al. Dnm1 forms spirals that are liposomes. Cell 94, 131–141 (1998).
requirement for dynamin 1 in synaptic vesicle structurally tailored to fit mitochondria. J. Cell Biol. 58. Ramachandran, R. et al. The dynamin middle domain
endocytosis. Science 316, 570–574 (2007). 170, 1021–1027 (2005). is critical for tetramerization and higher-order self-
Reveals using dynamin 1-knockout mice that, 36. Bian, X. et al. Structures of the atlastin GTPase assembly. EMBO J. 26, 559–566 (2007).
contrary to expectations, dynamin 1 is not required provide insight into homotypic fusion of endoplasmic 59. Low, H. H. & Lowe, J. Dynamin architecture — from
for the making of synaptic vesicles but rather reticulum membranes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, monomer to polymer. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 20,
serves to enhance the efficiency of this 3976–3981 (2011). 791–798 (2010).
clathrin-mediated process at synapses. 37. Byrnes, L. J. & Sondermann, H. Structural basis for 60. Wu, M. et al. Coupling between clathrin-dependent
18. Nakata, T. et al. Predominant and developmentally the nucleotide-dependent dimerization of the large endocytic budding and F-BAR-dependent tubulation in
regulated expression of dynamin in neurons. G protein atlastin-1/SPG3A. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA a cell-free system. Nature Cell Biol. 12, 902–908
Neuron 7, 461–469 (1991). 108, 2216–2221 (2011). (2010).
86 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
61. Bashkirov, P. V. et al. GTPase cycle of dynamin is 83. Barylko, B. et al. Synergistic activation of dynamin 108. Unsworth, K. E. et al. Dynamin is required for F-actin
coupled to membrane squeeze and release, leading to GTPase by Grb2 and phosphoinositides. J. Biol. Chem assembly and pedestal formation by enteropathogenic
spontaneous fission. Cell 135, 1276–1286 (2008). 273, 3791–3797 (1998). Escherichia coli (EPEC). Cell. Microbiol. 9, 438–449
Describes an in vitro membrane fission assay that 84. Zoncu, R. et al. Loss of endocytic clathrin-coated pits (2007).
suggests a role for repeated assembly and upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 109. Kubler, E. & Riezman, H. Actin and fimbrin are
disassembly of short dynamin scaffolds in the 4,5-bisphosphate. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, required for the internalization step of endocytosis in
triggering of membrane fission. 3793–3798 (2007). yeast. EMBO J. 12, 2855–2862 (1993).
62. Danino, D., Moon, K. H. & Hinshaw, J. E. Rapid 85. Gu, C. et al. Direct dynamin-actin interactions regulate 110. Gomez, T. S. et al. Dynamin 2 regulates T cell
constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical the actin cytoskeleton. EMBO J. 29, 3593–3606 activation by controlling actin polymerization at the
enzyme dynamin. J. Struct. Biol. 147, 259–267 (2010). immunological synapse. Nature Immunol. 6,
(2004). 86. Conibear, E. Converging views of endocytosis in yeast 261–270 (2005).
63. Pucadyil, T. J. & Schmid, S. L. Real-time visualization and mammals. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 513–518 111. Yamada, H. et al. Dynasore, a dynamin inhibitor,
of dynamin-catalyzed membrane fission and vesicle (2010). suppresses lamellipodia formation and cancer cell
release. Cell 135, 1263–1275 (2008). 87. Kaksonen, M., Toret, C. P. & Drubin, D. G. A modular invasion by destabilizing actin filaments. Biochem.
Reports an in vitro assay that closely mimics the design for the clathrin- and actin-mediated Biophys. Res. Commun. 390, 1142–1148 (2009).
in vivo situation by allowing observation of endocytosis machinery. Cell 123, 305–320 (2005). 112. Tanabe, K. & Takei, K. Dynamic instability of
dynamin-mediated membrane fission in the 88. Nannapaneni, S. et al. The yeast dynamin-like protein microtubules requires dynamin 2 and is impaired
continuous presence of GTP, and reveals Vps1:vps1 mutations perturb the internalization and in a Charcot–Marie–Tooth mutant. J. Cell Biol. 185,
the fluctuating assembly and disassembly the motility of endocytic vesicles and endosomes via 939–948 (2009).
of dynamin leading up to membrane fission. disorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Eur. J. Cell 113. Skop, A. R., Liu, H., Yates, J. 3rd, Meyer, B. J. &
64. Ghosh, A., Praefcke, G. J., Renault, L., Wittinghofer, A. Biol. 89, 499–508 (2010). Heald, R. Dissection of the mammalian midbody
& Herrmann, C. How guanylate-binding proteins 89. Smaczynska-de, R. II. et al. Yeast dynamin Vps1 and proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms.
achieve assembly-stimulated processive cleavage of amphiphysin Rvs167 function together during Science 305, 61–66 (2004).
GTP to GMP. Nature 440, 101–104 (2006). endocytosis. Traffic 14 Nov 2011 114. Chircop, M. et al. Phosphorylation of dynamin II at
65. Binns, D. D. et al. The mechanism of GTP hydrolysis by (doi:10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01311.x). serine-764 is associated with cytokinesis. Biochim.
dynamin II: a transient kinetic study. Biochemistry 39, 90. Kaksonen, M., Toret, C. P. & Drubin, D. G. Harnessing Biophys. Acta 1813, 1689–1699 (2011).
7188–7196 (2000). actin dynamics for clathrin-mediated endocytosis. 115. Thompson, H. M., Skop, A. R., Euteneuer, U., Meyer,
66. Krishnan, K. S. et al. Nucleoside diphosphate kinase, Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 404–414 (2006). B. J. & McNiven, M. A. The large GTPase dynamin
a source of GTP, is required for dynamin-dependent 91. Aghamohammadzadeh, S. & Ayscough, K. R. associates with the spindle midzone and is required
synaptic vesicle recycling. Neuron 30, 197–210 Differential requirements for actin during yeast and for cytokinesis. Curr. Biol. 12, 2111–2117 (2002).
(2001). mammalian endocytosis. Nature Cell Biol. 11, 116. Goss, J. W. & Toomre, D. K. Both daughter cells traffic
67. Taylor, M. J., Perrais, D. & Merrifield, C. J. A high 1039–1042 (2009). and exocytose membrane at the cleavage furrow
precision survey of the molecular dynamics of 92. Pelkmans, L., Puntener, D. & Helenius, A. Local actin during mammalian cytokinesis. J. Cell Biol. 181,
mammalian clathrin-mediated endocytosis. PLoS Biol. polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40- 1047–1054 (2008).
9, e1000604 (2011). induced internalization of caveolae. Science 296, 117. Gromley, A. et al. Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and
Details a systematic analysis of the recruitment of 535–539 (2002). SNARE complexes at the midbody is required for
a large collection of proteins to clathrin and their 93. Henley, J. R., Krueger, E. W., Oswald, B. J. & secretory-vesicle-mediated abscission. Cell 123,
relationship to the membrane fission event. McNiven, M. A. Dynamin-mediated internalization 75–87 (2005).
68. Collins, A., Warrington, A., Taylor, K. A. & Svitkina, T. of caveolae. J. Cell Biol. 141, 85–99 (1998). 118. Morita, E. et al. Human ESCRT and ALIX proteins
Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at 94. Jones, S. M., Howell, K. E., Henley, J. R., Cao, H. & interact with proteins of the midbody and function in
sites of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Curr. Biol. 21, McNiven, M. A. Role of dynamin in the formation of cytokinesis. EMBO J. 26, 4215–4227 (2007).
1167–1175 (2011). transport vesicles from the trans-Golgi network. 119. Tan, T. C. et al. Cdk5 is essential for synaptic vesicle
69. Liu, J., Sun, Y., Drubin, D. G. & Oster, G. F. The Science 279, 573–577 (1998). endocytosis. Nature Cell Biol. 5, 701–710 (2003).
mechanochemistry of endocytosis. PLoS Biol. 7, 95. Derivery, E. et al. The Arp2/3 activator WASH controls 120. Kashatus, D. F. et al. RALA and RALBP1 regulate
e1000204 (2009). the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein mitochondrial fission at mitosis. Nature Cell Biol. 13,
70. Chang-Ileto, B. et al. Synaptojanin 1-mediated PI(4,5) complex. Dev. Cell 17, 712–723 (2009). 1108–1115 (2011).
P hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature 96. Kreitzer, G., Marmorstein, A., Okamoto, P., Vallee, R. 121. Sorkin, A. & von Zastrow, M. Endocytosis and
2
and facilitates membrane fission. Dev. Cell 20, 206– & Rodriguez-Boulan, E. Kinesin and dynamin are signalling: intertwining molecular networks. Nature
218 (2011). required for post-Golgi transport of a plasma- Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 609–622 (2009).
71. Frost, A., Unger, V. M. & De Camilli, P. The BAR membrane protein. Nature Cell Biol. 2, 125–127 122. Sigismund, S. et al. Clathrin-mediated internalization is
domain superfamily: membrane-molding (2000). essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable
macromolecules. 97. Mesaki, K., Tanabe, K., Obayashi, M., Oe, N. & Takei, for degradation. Dev. Cell 15, 209–219 (2008).
Cell 137, 191–196 (2009). K. Fission of tubular endosomes triggers endosomal 123. Vieira, A. V., Lamaze, C. & Schmid, S. L. Control of EGF
72. Farsad, K. et al. Generation of high curvature acidification and movement. PloS ONE 6, e19764 receptor signaling by clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer (2011). Science 274, 2086–2089 (1996).
interactions. J. Cell Biol. 155, 193–200 (2001). 98. Rothman, J. H., Raymond, C. K., Gilbert, T., O’Hara, 124. Windler, S. L. & Bilder, D. Endocytic internalization
73. Takei, K., Slepnev, V. I., Haucke, V. & De Camilli, P. P. J. & Stevens, T. H. A putative GTP binding protein routes required for Delta/Notch signaling. Curr. Biol.
Functional partnership between amphiphysin and homologous to interferon-inducible Mx proteins 20, 538–543 (2010).
dynamin in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Nature Cell performs an essential function in yeast protein sorting. 125. Poodry, C. A. shibire, a neurogenic mutant of
Biol. 1, 33–39 (1999). Cell 61, 1063–1074 (1990). Drosophila. Dev. Biol. 138, 464–472 (1990).
74. Huang, F., Khvorova, A., Marshall, W. & Sorkin, A. 99. Yarar, D., Waterman-Storer, C. M. & Schmid, S. L. A 126. Polo, S. & Di Fiore, P. P. Endocytosis conducts the cell
Analysis of clathrin-mediated endocytosis of epidermal dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple signaling orchestra. Cell 124, 897–900 (2006).
growth factor receptor by RNA interference. J. Biol. stages of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Mol. Biol. Cell 127. Shen, H. et al. Constitutive activated
Chem. 279, 16657–16661 (2004). 16, 964–975 (2005). Cdc42-associated kinase (Ack) phosphorylation at
75. Henne, W. M. et al. FCHo proteins are nucleators of 100. Boulant, S., Kural, C., Zeeh, J. C., Ubelmann, F. & arrested endocytic clathrin-coated pits of cells that
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Science 328, Kirchhausen, T. Actin dynamics counteract membrane lack dynamin.
1281–1284 (2010). tension during clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Mol. Biol. Cell 22, 493–502 (2011).
76. Traub, L. M. Tickets to ride: selecting cargo for Nature Cell Biol. 13, 1124–1131 (2011). 128. Chircop, M. et al. Inhibition of dynamin by dynole
clathrin-regulated internalization. Nature Rev. Mol. 101. Schlunck, G. et al. Modulation of Rac localization and 34–2 induces cell death following cytokinesis failure in
Cell Biol. 10, 583–596 (2009). function by dynamin. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 256–267 cancer cells. Mol. Cancer Ther. 10, 1553–1562
77. Kirchhausen, T. Adaptors for clathrin-mediated traffic. (2004). (2011).
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 705–732 (1999). 102. Krueger, E. W., Orth, J. D., Cao, H. & McNiven, M. A. 129. Goldenthal, K. L., Pastan, I. & Willingham, M. C. Initial
78. Saffarian, S., Cocucci, E. & Kirchhausen, T. Distinct A dynamin-cortactin-Arp2/3 complex mediates actin steps in receptor-mediated endocytosis. The influence
dynamics of endocytic clathrin-coated pits and coated reorganization in growth factor-stimulated cells. of temperature on the shape and distribution of
plaques. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000191 (2009). Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 1085–1096 (2003). plasma membrane clathrin-coated pits in cultured
79. Itoh, T. et al. Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton 103. Gold, E. S. et al. Dynamin 2 is required for mammalian cells. Exp. Cell Res. 152, 558–564
cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination phagocytosis in macrophages. J. Exp. Med. 190, (1984).
by BAR and F-BAR proteins. Dev. Cell 9, 791–804 1849–1856 (1999). 130. Dittman, J. & Ryan, T. A. Molecular circuitry of
(2005). 104. Baldassarre, M. et al. Dynamin participates in focal endocytosis at nerve terminals. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
80. Perera, R. M., Zoncu, R., Lucast, L., De Camilli, P. & extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells. Biol. 25, 133–160 (2009).
Toomre, D. Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 1074–1084 (2003). 131. Newton, A. J., Kirchhausen, T. & Murthy, V. N.
to clathrin-coated pits at different stages. Proc. Natl 105. Ochoa, G. C. et al. A functional link between dynamin Inhibition of dynamin completely blocks compensatory
Acad. Sci. USA 103, 19332–19337 (2006). and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes. J. Cell Biol. synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
81. Damke, H., Binns, D. D., Ueda, H., Schmid, S. L. & 150, 377–389 (2000). 103, 17955–17960 (2006).
Baba, T. Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block 106. Lee, E. & De Camilli, P. Dynamin at actin tails. 132. Shupliakov, O. et al. Synaptic vesicle endocytosis
endocytic vesicle formation at morphologically distinct Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 161–166 impaired by disruption of dynamin-SH3 domain
stages. Mol. Biol. Cell 12, 2578–2589 (2001). (2002). interactions. Science 276, 259–263 (1997).
82. Massol, R., Boll, W., Griffin, A. M. & Kirchhausen, T. 107. Orth, J. D., Krueger, E. W., Cao, H. & McNiven, M. A. 133. Sundborger, A. et al. An endophilin–dynamin complex
burst of auxilin recruitment determines the onset of The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet promotes budding of clathrin-coated vesicles during
clathrin-coated vesicle uncoating. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. formation and movement in living cells. Proc. Natl synaptic vesicle recycling. J. Cell Sci. 124, 133–143
USA 103, 10265–10270 (2006). Acad. Sci. USA 99, 167–172 (2002). (2011).
NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 87
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
134. Xu, J. et al. GTP-independent rapid and slow 157. Patterson, E. E. et al. A canine DNM1 mutation is 181. Antonny, B. Membrane deformation by protein coats.
endocytosis at a central synapse. Nature Neurosci. 11, highly associated with the syndrome of exercise- Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 18, 386–394 (2006).
45–53 (2008). induced collapse. Nature Genet. 40, 1235–1239 182. McMahon, H. T. & Gallop, J. L. Membrane curvature
135. Yamashita, T., Hige, T. & Takahashi, T. Vesicle (2008). and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane
endocytosis requires dynamin-dependent GTP 158. Donaldson, J. G. & Jackson, C. L. ARF family G remodelling. Nature 438, 590–596 (2005).
hydrolysis at a fast CNS synapse. Science 307, proteins and their regulators: roles in membrane 183. Peter, B. J. et al. BAR domains as sensors of
124–127 (2005). transport, development and disease. Nature Rev. Mol. membrane curvature: the amphiphysin BAR structure.
136. Lou, X., Paradise, S., Ferguson, S. M. & De Camilli, P. Cell Biol. 12, 362–375 (2011). Science 303, 495–499 (2004).
Selective saturation of slow endocytosis at a giant 159. Detmer, S. A. & Chan, D. C. Functions and 184. Frost, A. et al. Structural basis of membrane
glutamatergic central synapse lacking dynamin 1. dysfunctions of mitochondrial dynamics. Nature Rev. invagination by F-BAR domains. Cell 132, 807–817
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 17555–17560 Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 870–879 (2007). (2008).
(2008). 160. Hoppins, S., Lackner, L. & Nunnari, J. The machines 185. Shimada, A. et al. Curved EFC/F-BAR-domain dimers
137. Isaka, F. et al. Ectopic expression of the bHLH gene that divide and fuse mitochondria. Annu. Rev. are joined end to end into a filament for membrane
Math1 disturbs neural development. Eur. J. Neurosci. Biochem. 76, 751–780 (2007). invagination in endocytosis. Cell 129, 761–772
11, 2582–2588 (1999). 161. Okamoto, K. & Shaw, J. M. Mitochondrial morphology (2007).
138. Dewachter, I. et al. Neuronal deficiency of presenilin 1 and dynamics in yeast and multicellular eukaryotes. 186. Wang, Q. et al. Molecular mechanism of membrane
inhibits amyloid plaque formation and corrects Annu. Rev. Genet. 39, 503–536 (2005). constriction and tubulation mediated by the F-BAR
hippocampal long-term potentiation but not a 162. Westermann, B. Mitochondrial fusion and fission in protein pacsin/syndapin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
cognitive defect of amyloid precursor protein [V717I] cell life and death. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 106, 12700–12705 (2009).
transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 22, 3445–3453 (2002). 872–884 (2010). 187. Rao, Y. et al. Molecular basis for SH3 domain
139. Cousin, M. A. & Robinson, P. J. The dephosphins: 163. Eppinga, R. D. et al. Increased expression of the large regulation of F-BAR-mediated membrane
dephosphorylation by calcineurin triggers synaptic GTPase dynamin 2 potentiates metastatic migration deformation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,
vesicle endocytosis. Trends Neurosci. 24, 659–665 and invasion of pancreatic ductal carcinoma. 8213–8218 (2010).
(2001). Oncogene 15 Aug 2011 (doi:10.1038/onc.2011.329). 188. Cipolat, S., Martins de Brito, O., Dal Zilio, B. &
140. Lee, S. Y., Wenk, M. R., Kim, Y., Nairn, A. C. & 164. Hollingworth, P. et al. Common variants at ABCA7, Scorrano, L. OPA1 requires mitofusin 1 to promote
De Camilli, P. Regulation of synaptojanin 1 by cyclin- MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are mitochondrial fusion. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101,
dependent kinase 5 at synapses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Genet. 15927–15932 (2004).
USA 101, 546–551 (2004). 43, 429–435 (2011). 189. Moss, T. J., Daga, A. & McNew, J. A. Fusing a lasting
141. McPherson, P. S., Takei, K., Schmid, S. L. & De Camilli, 165. Naj, A. C. et al. Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, relationship between ER tubules. Trends Cell Biol. 21,
P. p145, a major Grb2-binding protein in brain, is CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late- 416–423 (2011).
co-localized with dynamin in nerve terminals where it onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Genet. 43, 436– 190. Gao, S. et al. Structure of myxovirus resistance protein
undergoes activity-dependent dephosphorylation. 441 (2011). a reveals intra- and intermolecular domain
J. Biol. Chem. 269, 30132–30139 (1994). 166. Veiga, E. et al. Invasive and adherent bacterial interactions required for the antiviral function.
142. Lu, J. et al. Postsynaptic positioning of endocytic pathogens co-opt host clathrin for infection. Cell Host Immunity 35,
zones and AMPA receptor cycling by physical coupling Microbe 2, 340–351 (2007). 514–525 (2011).
of dynamin-3 to Homer. Neuron 55, 874–889 (2007). 167. Hu, J. et al. A class of dynamin-like GTPases involved 191. Kim, B. H. et al. A family of IFN-γ–inducible 65-kD
143. Carroll, R. C. et al. Dynamin-dependent endocytosis of in the generation of the tubular ER network. Cell 138, GTPases protects against bacterial infection. Science
ionotropic glutamate receptors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 549–561 (2009). 332, 717–721 (2011).
USA 96, 14112–14117 (1999). 168. Orso, G. et al. Homotypic fusion of ER membranes 192. MacMicking, J. D. IFN-inducible GTPases and
144. Perez-Otano, I. et al. Endocytosis and synaptic requires the dynamin-like GTPase atlastin. Nature immunity to intracellular pathogens. Trends Immunol.
removal of NR3A-containing NMDA receptors by 460, 978–983 (2009). 25,
PACSIN1/syndapin1. Nature Neurosci. 9, 611–621 169. Haller, O., Gao, S., von der Malsburg, A., Daumke, O. 601–609 (2004).
(2006). & Kochs, G. Dynamin-like MxA GTPase: structural 193. Gao, H., Kadirjan-Kalbach, D., Froehlich, J. E. &
145. Hayashi, M. et al. Cell- and stimulus-dependent insights into oligomerization and implications for Osteryoung, K. W. ARC5, a cytosolic dynamin-like
heterogeneity of synaptic vesicle endocytic recycling antiviral activity. J. Biol. Chem 285, 28419–28424 protein from plants, is part of the chloroplast division
mechanisms revealed by studies of dynamin 1-null (2010). machinery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 2175–2180 170. Prakash, B., Praefcke, G. J., Renault, L., Wittinghofer, 4328–4333 (2003).
(2008). A. & Herrmann, C. Structure of human guanylate- 194. Glynn, J. M., Miyagishima, S. Y., Yoder, D. W.,
146. Clayton, E. L. et al. The phospho-dependent dynamin- binding protein 1 representing a unique class of GTP- Osteryoung, K. W. & Vitha, S. Chloroplast division.
syndapin interaction triggers activity-dependent bulk binding proteins. Nature 403, 567–571 (2000). Traffic 8, 451–461 (2007).
endocytosis of synaptic vesicles. J. Neurosci. 29, 171. Gu, X. & Verma, D. P. Phragmoplastin, a dynamin-like 195. Vater, C. A., Raymond, C. K., Ekena, K., Howald-
7706–7717 (2009). protein associated with cell plate formation in plants. Stevenson, I. & Stevens, T. H. The VPS1 protein, a
147. Zuchner, S. et al. Mutations in the pleckstrin homology EMBO J. 15, 695–704 (1996). homolog of dynamin required for vacuolar protein
domain of dynamin 2 cause dominant intermediate 172. Low, H. H., Sachse, C., Amos, L. A. & Lowe, J. sorting in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a GTPase with
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease. Nature Genet. 37, Structure of a bacterial dynamin-like protein lipid tube two functionally separable domains. J. Cell Biol. 119,
289–294 (2005). provides a mechanism for assembly and membrane 773–786 (1992).
148. Bitoun, M. et al. Mutations in dynamin 2 cause curving.
dominant centronuclear myopathy. Nature Genet. 37, Cell 139, 1342–1352 (2009). Acknowledgements
1207–1209 (2005). 173. Miyagishima, S. Y. et al. A plant-specific dynamin- This work was supported in part by the Howard Hughes
149. Durieux, A. C., Prudhon, B., Guicheney, P. & Bitoun, related protein forms a ring at the chloroplast division Medical Institute, the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers
M. Dynamin 2 and human diseases. J. Mol. Med. 88, site. Plant Cell 15, 655–665 (2003). Charitable Foundation, US National Institutes of Health
339–350 (2010). 174. Daumke, O. et al. Architectural and mechanistic grants (R37NS036251, DK45735 and DA018343), the
150. Nicot, A. S. et al. Mutations in amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane W. M. Keck Foundation and a National Alliance for Research
disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause remodelling. Nature 449, 923–927 (2007). on Schizophrenia and Depression distinguished investigator
autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy. 175. Delettre, C. et al. Nuclear gene OPA1, encoding a award to P.D.C. We thank H. Shen, M. Pirucello, A. Raimondi
Nature Genet. 39, 1134–1139 (2007). mitochondrial dynamin-related protein, is mutated in and O. Daumke for their suggestions and insights and
151. Lee, E. et al. Amphiphysin 2 (Bin1) and T-tubule dominant optic atrophy. Nature Genet. 26, 207–210 M. Pirucello and A. Raimondi for assistance with the prepara-
biogenesis in muscle. Science 297, 1193–1196 (2000). tion of figures.
(2002). 176. Zuchner, S. et al. Mutations in the mitochondrial
152. Boumil, R. M. et al. A missense mutation in a highly GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot–Marie–Tooth Competing interests statement
conserved alternate exon of dynamin-1 causes neuropathy type 2A. Nature Genet. 36, 449–451 The authors declare no competing financial interests.
epilepsy in fitful mice. PLoS Genet. 6, e1001046 (2004).
(2010). 177. Zhao, X. et al. Mutations in a newly identified GTPase
153. Di Paolo, G. et al. Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling gene cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic DATABASES
efficiency and cognitive deficits in amphiphysin 1 paraplegia. Nature Genet. 29, 326–331 (2001). Protein Data Bank: http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do
knockout mice. Neuron 33, 789–804 (2002). 178. Waterham, H. R. et al. A lethal defect of mitochondrial 3SNH
154. Koch, D. et al. Proper synaptic vesicle formation and and peroxisomal fission. N. Engl. J. Med. 356,
neuronal network activity critically rely on syndapin I. 1736–1741 (2007). FURTHER INFORMATION
EMBO J. 30, 4955–4969 (2011). 179. Baumgart, T., Capraro, B. R., Zhu, C. & Das, S. L. Pietro De Camilli’s homepage:
155. Milosevic, I. et al. Recruitment of endophilin to Thermodynamics and mechanics of membrane http://medicine.yale.edu/labs/decamilli/www/Home.html
clathrin-coated pit necks is required for efficient vesicle curvature generation and sensing by proteins and
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
uncoating after fission. Neuron 72, 587–601 (2011). lipids. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 62, 483–506 (2011).
156. Fassio, A. et al. SYN1 loss-of-function mutations in 180. Farsad, K. & De Camilli, P. Mechanisms of membrane See online article: S1 (table) | S2 (box)
autism and partial epilepsy cause impaired synaptic deformation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 15, 372–381 ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
function. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 2297–2307 (2011). (2003).
88 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

---PAGE BREAK---

