Journal Pre-proofs
Review Article
From lysosomal storage disorders to Parkinson’s Disease – Challenges and
opportunities
Rebecca Mächtel, Fanni Annamaria Boros, Jan Philipp Dobert, Philipp
Arnold, Friederike Zunke
PII: S0022-2836(22)00559-9
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167932
Reference: YJMBI 167932
To appear in: Journal of Molecular Biology
Received Date: 5 October 2022
Revised Date: 14 December 2022
Accepted Date: 19 December 2022
Please cite this article as: R. Mächtel, F. Annamaria Boros, J. Philipp Dobert, P. Arnold, F. Zunke, From
lysosomal storage disorders to Parkinson’s Disease – Challenges and opportunities, Journal of Molecular Biology
(2022), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2022.167932
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover
page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version
will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are
providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors
may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2022 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

---PAGE BREAK---

From lysosomal storage disorders to Parkinson’s Disease –
Challenges and opportunities
Rebecca Mächtel1, Fanni Annamaria Boros1, Jan Philipp Dobert1, Philipp Arnold2 and
Friederike Zunke1
1Department of Molecular Neurology, University Clinics Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
2Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-
Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany
Keywords:
Parkinson’s disease, lysosome, lysosomal enzymes, lysosomal storage disorder,
neurodegeneration
Funding:
We acknowledge the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s research for continuous
support.
List of abbreviations:
4-MU, 4-methylumbelliferyl; aSyn, α-synuclein; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; AD, Alzheimer
disease; AVV, adenovirus vector; BBB, blood-brain barrier; CLN2, ceroid lipofuscinosis type
2; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CTSx, cathepsin x; ER,
endoplasmic reticulum; EOPD, early onset Parkinson’s disease; ERT, enzyme replacement
therapy; GD, Gaucher’s disease; GWAS, genome-wide association studies; iPSCs, induced
pluripotent stem cells; MLD, Metachromatic leukodystrophy; MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine; NCL, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis; KRS, Kufor-Rabek syndrome;
LSD, lysosomal storage disease/disorder; PCT, pharmacological chaperone therapy; PD,
Parkinson’s disease; SRT, substrate reduction therapy
For further gene, protein, and disease names/abbreviations, see Table 1
1

---PAGE BREAK---

Abstract
Lysosomes are specialized organelles with an acidic pH that act as recycling hubs for
intracellular and extracellular components. They harbour numerous different hydrolytic
enzymes to degrade substrates like proteins, peptides, and glycolipids. Reduced catalytic
activity of lysosomal enzymes can cause the accumulation of these substrates and loss of
lysosomal integrity, resulting in lysosomal dysfunction and lysosomal storage disorders
(LSDs). Post-mitotic cells, such as neurons, seem to be highly sensitive to damages induced
by lysosomal dysfunction, thus LSDs often manifest with neurological symptoms. Interestingly,
some LSDs and Parkinson’s disease (PD) share common cellular pathomechanisms,
suggesting convergence of aetiology of the two disease types. This is further underlined by
genetic associations of several lysosomal genes involved in LSDs with PD. The increasing
number of lysosome-associated genetic risk factors for PD makes it necessary to understand
functions and interactions of lysosomal proteins/enzymes both in healthy and disease states,
thereby holding the potential to identify new therapeutic targets. In this review, we highlight
genetic and mechanistic interactions between the complex lysosomal network, LSDs and PD,
and elaborate on methodical challenges in lysosomal research.
2

---PAGE BREAK---

Lysosomal dysfunction in neurons can be provoked by different mechanisms, which can
reinforce each other reciprocally. Single mutations of proteins within these pathways are
often the culprit for the development of specific LSDs, and these protein variants show a
significant overlap with the development of PD. Although LSDs and PD share several
pathomechanisms, the connections often are elusive and complex. (Figure created with
BioRender.com.)
3

---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 1 Overview of lysosomal formation and function highlighting PD-associated pathways
and genetic variants. Lysosomes are acidic vesicles with a lipid-bilayer membrane. They
consist of specialized lysosomal membrane proteins and hydrolases that maintain lysosomal
homeostasis. Relevant steps in lysosome formation and maintenance are indicated together
with examples of lysosomal proteins of which certain genetic variants have been identified as
PD risk factors. This includes lysosomal membrane proteins affecting lysosomal integrity,
lysosomal enzymes for the degradation of various substrates including the PD-associated
protein α-synuclein (aSyn), as well as components of the intracellular trafficking machinery.
Introduction – Lysosomal (dys)functions and correlations to
Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the
irreversible loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Worldwide,
about 1 % of people above 60 years are affected by PD, yet approximately 10 % of PD cases
manifest at younger ages (as early as patients in their 30s). These are referred to as early
onset PD (EOPD) [1, 2]. A large number of studies revealed a family history in 15-25 % of the
diagnoses, but only 5-10% of all cases could be identified as monogenic forms, caused by a
single mutation of a high risk gene [3]. To date, pathogenic mutations of several genes could
4

---PAGE BREAK---

be identified as an inheritable source for (EO)PD, e.g., SNCA, LRRK2, VPS35 (autosomal
dominant), and PRKN, PINK1, DJ1 (autosomal recessive) [4]. However, PD is a multifactorial
disease, which appears with various symptoms and underlying pathomechanisms. Besides
genetic factors, various lifestyle and environmental factors contribute to its development, and
combinations thereof [5]. Nonetheless, the growing number of genetic variants identified or
proposed to contribute to the disease implies that such genetic factors could play an important
role in a great percentage of idiopathic PD cases as well.
The pathohistological hallmark of PD are Lewy bodies consisting mainly of aggregated α-
synuclein (aSyn) and other aggregation-prone proteins [6]. Interestingly, a number of recent
studies show mechanistic as well as genetic connections between lysosomal (dys)function and
PD pathology. This highlights the role of lysosomal pathways in the development of
neurodegeneration, and proposes a complex interplay between lysosomal neurodegenerative
disorders and PD caused by genetic mutations in lysosomal proteins.
Structure and function of the lysosomal system
Lysosomes are specialized organelles, which degrade and recycle proteins, glycolipids and
other intra- and extracellular components. They have an indispensable role in multiple
essential processes such as autophagy and endocytosis, thus providing pathogen control and
depletion of toxic substrates and degradation products [7]. Lysosomal membranes embed
ATP-consuming proton pumps to retain a luminal pH of 4.6 to 5.0 [8, 9]. The acidic pH is
essential for the activity of over 60 highly specialized hydrolases [10], as it assures their activity
exclusively in the lysosome, thus protecting cell compartments with cytosolic pH from arbitrary
degradation. It should be mentioned, however, that some lysosomal hydrolases also exhibit
enzymatic activity at neutral pH [11-13].
The group of lysosomal hydrolases encompasses nucleases, glucosidases, phosphatases,
proteases, sulfatases, and lipid or polysaccharide degrading enzymes [10, 14, 15]. Lysosomal
proteins are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and travel through the Golgi
apparatus where they undergo post-translational modification. To ensure targeting to the
5

---PAGE BREAK---

lysosome, most lysosomal proteins are tagged with mannose 6-phosphate, which is
recognized by the mannose-6-phosphate receptor (M6PR). The cytoplasmic tail of the M6PR
and specific sorting signals then direct the enzyme-M6PR-complex to the lysosome. While
binding is most effective at pH 6.0-7.0, the acidic pH in lysosomes provokes release of the
bound enzyme, allowing the M6PR to be recycled for further transport processes [16]. Two
forms, commonly termed cation-independent [17] and cation-dependent [18] M6PR, are
essential players in maintenance of proper lysosomal function [19]. Although most lysosomal
enzymes are transported via the M6PR pathway, exceptions exist where specialized transport
proteins facilitate M6PR-independent lysosomal trafficking. One of these examples is the
lysosomal integral membrane protein 2 (LIMP-2), which exclusively transports β-
glucocerebrosidase (GCase) to the lysosome [20, 21]. In total, more than 50 membrane-
associated proteins maintain the lysosomal environment, perform metabolic signalling and
orchestrate import and export of hydrolases, substrates, metabolites and ions [10]. As
indicated in Figure 1, essential pathways in preserving lysosomal function and homeostasis
are i) trafficking of lysosomal enzymes/proteins via the secretory pathway, ii) maintenance of
the acidic pH, iii) efficient turnover of substrates, iv) export of certain substrates and
metabolites (i.e. via exocytosis), and v) communication with the cell membrane. Further,
autophagy processes are essential for the functionality of the whole cell, as accumulation of
toxic substrates, pathogens, cellular debris, and fragmented proteins can influence cellular and
protein functions, at most even inducing cell death [22]. Macroautophagy is crucial for organelle
recycling/renewal and to remove aggregated proteins and cell debris from cells. Key players
in this process are autophagosomes that form in the cytoplasm where they engulf their
substrates before fusing with lysosomes, thus forming autolysosomes. As an alternative
pathway to enter lysosomal degradation, substrates can be taken up via chaperone-mediated
autophagy [23]. For proper autophagic function, a tight regulation is indispensable, including
up- or downregulation of proteins, and signal cascades for autophagosome or autolysosome
formation [23, 24]. Important components are lysosome-associated Hsc70 chaperones that
bind to substrates and transport them to the lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP-
6

---PAGE BREAK---

2) to form a translocation complex that delivers the substrate into the lysosomal compartment
[25]. Several other proteins, e.g., transcription factor TFEB, and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
(LRRK2), affect autophagic function of cells [26-28].
Failures in the function of lysosomes can lead to various diseases, most notable to those
referred as lysosomal storage diseases or disorders (LSDs). At least 50 types of LSDs have
been described to date that are mostly of autosomal-recessive character [29, 30]. They are
characterized by defects of lysosomal proteins and consequent accumulation of undegraded
macromolecules and are largely caused by genetic variations in genes coding for lysosomal
hydrolases. LSDs often manifest with neurological symptoms and neurodegeneration [31] due
to accumulating substrates causing cellular dysfunction. Neurons are especially sensitive
towards the accumulation of cellular waste, in part because of their post-mitotic character.
Consequently, substrate accumulation in the brain often leads to neurotoxicity and irreversible
cell loss [32, 33]. Furthermore, insufficient lysosomal degradation includes scant removal of
neurodegeneration-associated proteins like the aggregation-prone aSyn (encoded by SNCA)
or other harmful molecules [24, 34, 35]. As a result, accumulation of undegraded substrates
can serve as a trigger in initiating secondary pathogenic cascades, affecting molecules not
directly related to the defective enzyme. This causes, for example, perturbation in membrane
composition, impaired intracellular vesicle fusion and trafficking, impaired autophagic function,
disturbance in calcium homeostasis, mitochondrial abnormalities and excessive accumulation
of reactive oxygen species [36].
LSDs often share symptoms with PD and different forms of parkinsonism and a growing
number of studies showed connections on the genetic and the molecular level between the
two diseases, as summarized in Table 1. This raises the question whether these disorders
share common or similar underlying pathomechanisms. In the following chapters, we will
present examples of lysosomal dysfunctions to illustrate how the understanding of lysosomal
(dys)functions can lead to a better comprehension of PD pathology and the identification of
novel biomarkers, diagnostic tools or therapeutic targets.
7

---PAGE BREAK---

Table 1: Overview lysosomal enzymes and diseases – see end of Review
α-Synuclein degradation by lysosomal cathepsins
A direct link between lysosomal function and PD might be the degradation of aSyn within the
lysosomal system. While the proteasome is also involved in aSyn degradation [37], clearance
of aSyn aggregates is preferentially mediated through endocytosis, macroautophagy and
chaperone-mediated autophagy [38-40]. The bulk degradation of protein substrates, including
aggregated aSyn, within the lysosome is mainly mediated by lysosomal cathepsins. These
cathepsins do not only degrade proteins, but are also crucial for processing, maturation and
regulation of other lysosomal proteins and enzymes. Thus, it is unsurprising that deficiency of
lysosomal cathepsins can disrupt lysosomal function and lead to LSDs. Examples are neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis type 10 (NCL10) and 13 (NCL13), in which lipofuscin is insufficiently
degraded by cathepsins D (CTSD) and F (CTSF), respectively [41-43]. Another example is
galactosialidosis, where the lack of cathepsin A causes dysregulation of neuraminidase-1 and
beta-galactosidase, leading to accumulation of sialylated substrates [44, 45]. CTSD merits
special attention here, as genetic alterations in the CTSD gene have not only been linked to
NCL10, but also to neurodegenerative disease, namely Alzheimer disease (AD) [46-49], and
PD. Not only CTSD, but also cathepsin B (CTSB) emerged as an active player in PD pathology
as both have been shown to be important for aSyn cleavage and genetic variants have been
identified as risk factors for PD [50-53]. The link between CTSD and PD is further solidified by
studies of a CTSD-deficient (Ctsd-/-) NCL10 mouse model, which displays disturbed
autophagosomal function and aSyn aggregation [54]. Although no genetic variants of
cathepsins L (CTSL) and K have been associated with PD so far, both enzymes have been
shown to cleave aSyn, even its aggregated forms [50, 55].
Accumulation of aSyn aggregates can occur directly within the lysosome, manifesting again
the organelle’s key role in PD pathology [56]. In line with this, up- or down-regulation of
lysosomal cathepsins as a potential mechanism or even biomarker of PD has gained interest
recently. However, data about CTSD levels and activity in the context of PD is ambiguous
8

---PAGE BREAK---

between studies, most likely due to the analysis of different body fluids and tissue samples.
For example, in studies analysing blood serum samples of PD, CTSD levels were either
reduced [57] or unchanged [58]. On the other hand, a study looking at cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
reported CTSD activity to be unchanged in PD patients [59], while another publication reported
unchanged protein levels of CTSD and CTSL but increased levels of CTSB and CTSF in PD-
derived CSF samples [60]. A study analysing brain tissue showed no significant changes in
CTSB, D and L activity in PD patients [61]. On the contrary, studies using patient-derived cell
models reported increased CTSD levels in multiple Gaucher’s disease (GD) and GBA-PD
fibroblasts harbouring different mutations (p.N370S, p.L444P, c1263del55, 203insC, RecNcil)
[62] and iPSC-derived neurons of different p.N370S mutation-carrying GBA-PD patients [63].
Characterization of selected PD-associated CTSD variants (p.V95I, p.G145V, p.A239V,
p.R266H, p.D97S) reported no significant impact of these mutations on enzyme activity, except
for p.A239V, which increased activity in an in vitro study [43]. Thus, the exact role and potential
as biomarker of lysosomal cathepsins in PD remains a topic of discussion. It is important to
mention that protein levels and activity of lysosomal hydrolases are not equivalent read-outs
because impairments in cellular transport or maturation may not affect total cell protein levels,
but will affect lysosomal activity. Nonetheless, modulation of lysosomal cathepsin activity may
be a powerful tool in the treatment of PD as shown by a recent study which explored
administration of recombinant CTSD as a therapeutic approach to reduce aSyn burden [64].
This study showed that an administered recombinant pro-form of CTSD was taken up and
processed into catalytically active enzyme by iPS-derived neurons. Furthermore, treatment
with recombinant CTSD reduced aggregated aSyn levels and restored overall lysosomal
function in PD patient-derived dopaminergic neurons harbouring the SNCA p.A53T mutation
[64]. Importantly, the positive effects of CTSD treatment on aSyn clearance were reproduced
in the already mentioned CTSD-deficient (Ctsd-/-) NCL10 mouse model, in which previous
studies had already shown that intracranial injection of these mice with recombinant CTSD
improved autophagy, life span, and disease phenotype [65].
9

---PAGE BREAK---

In summary, lysosomal cathepsins appear to play a central role in the maintenance of
lysosomal function and the degradation of aSyn. However, due to the heterogenous data on
dysregulation of different cathepsins in PD along with the complexity of regulatory interactions
within the protease web of the lysosome, we refrain from providing a general conclusion about
the exact mechanisms by which different cathepsins modulate PD pathology. Nonetheless,
therapeutic intervention targeting cathepsin activity, as shown for CTSD, could be a promising
approach towards tackling neurodegeneration.
Dysfunctional substrate cleaving enzymes and impaired metabolism
As the brain is characterized by a high lipid content with dense lipid rafts in the neuronal
membrane [66], ceramides – fundamental components of all major sphingolipid species – play
an important role in the regulation of central nervous system (CNS) homeostasis [67].
Glucosylceramide and galactosylceramide are sphingolipids degraded within the lysosome by
β-glucocerebrosidase (GCase) and β-galactosylceramidase (GALC), respectively. For both
enzymes, several hundred mutations have been identified on the genomic level. Loss of
function mutations in GBA1 (encoding GCase) and GALC genes cause the LSDs GD [68-70]
and Krabbe disease [71, 72], respectively. For GD, three different types are defined based on
the severity of symptoms [73]. While patients suffering from type 1 show no neurological
symptoms, type 2 and 3 patients develop neurological problems. Here, type 2 is most severe
and patients normally report with symptoms as infants and, if untreated, die around the age of
9 months [74]. Interestingly, some GBA1 mutations found in GD patients were also identified
as risk factors for EOPD [75]. While manifestation of GD requires homozygous or compound
heterozygous GBA1 mutations, specific heterozygous GBA1 genotypes like the p.N370S
mutation are sufficient for an increased PD risk and not correlated to GD. On the molecular
level it was demonstrated that the substrate of GCase, glucosylceramide, interacts with and
stabilizes aSyn oligomers inducing the formation of cell toxic aSyn species [76]. Knockdown
of GCase in vitro resulted in impaired lysosomal clearance capacity and consequently led to
aSyn accumulation. Additionally, in vitro findings showed that glucosylceramide stabilizes the
10

---PAGE BREAK---

soluble high molecular weight intermediate forms of the protein [76]. Accumulation of these
toxic oligomeric species not only leads to neurodegeneration, but also causes the depletion of
lysosomal GCase. This bi-directional effect of GCase and aSyn creates a vicious circle, which
can lead to a self-propagating disease [76]. Furthermore, a feedback loop between aggregated
aSyn caused reduction of proteinphosphatase 2A activation, leading to a lack of aSyn
dephosphorylation, has been proposed [77]. As ceramide acts as an activator of
proteinphosphatase 2A, accumulation of aggregation prone phosphorylated aSyn species can
occur also due to insufficient proteinphosphatase 2A activity [78]. Additionally, ageing is a
major risk factor of neurodegenerative diseases (reviewed in [79]), and ceramides have been
shown to accumulate in relation with ageing [80] while being implicated in processes
contributing to the pathomechanism of neurodegenerative disorders. These include cellular
senescence, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis [81-83], thus it is not surprising that imbalances
of ceramide metabolism have been implicated in PD and other age-related neurodegenerative
diseases [84].
Krabbe disease (also known as globoid cell leukodystrophy; GLD), manifests in 95 % of the
cases as an early form at ages between one and seven months, leading to death within the
first two years [85]. Most remaining cases have onset ages between six months and three
years, also resulting in an early death after two to three more years [86]. Typical hallmarks in
all cases are stiffness, decreased psychomotor functions, blindness, and hyperirritability. At
least 60 out of the 260 known variants of GALC cause different variants of Krabbe disease. An
impaired enzyme activity causes accumulation of galactosylceramide in oligodendrocytes and
subsequent demyelination [72, 87, 88]. A side effect of the disease is the emergence of
neuronal inclusions containing ubiquitin and aggregated aSyn. Analysis of post mortem brain
tissue revealed significantly increased psychosine content in the cortex and a trend towards
decrease enzyme activity in both grey and white matter of PD patients compared to controls.
However, also risk variants with increased enzyme activity exist and are associated with PD
[89]. For some PD-correlated variants, psychosine concentrations were particularly increased
in cortical samples of PD patients [90]. In an in vitro assay, psychosine was found to promote
11

---PAGE BREAK---

aSyn fibrillization [91]. These findings support the notion that dysfunctional psychosine
metabolism could lead to the accumulation of the lipid in the ageing brain, thus contributing to
the risk of the development of aSyn pathology [90]. Furthermore, genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) and genome sequencing in cohort studies proposed various GALC variants
to serve as risk factors of PD [52, 92, 93]. Such variant is the SNP rs8005172, which was found
to be associated with PD in the Chinese population [94].
Galactosylceramide can be formed by the cleavage of sulfate groups of sulfatides, catalysed
by Arylsulfatase A (ARSA), which is then further hydrolysed by GALC. Mutations within the
ARSA gene cause impaired activity of the enzyme and lead to the accumulation of sulfatides
in the nervous system and visceral organs, resulting in metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD),
a rare autosomal recessive LSD [95-97]. Suzuki et al. [98] reported a possible mechanistic link
between PD and MLD. They observed diffuse aSyn accumulation among axons and glial cells
in brain stem and cerebral white matter samples of MLD patients. Partial loss of ARSA
enzymatic activity was significantly more frequent among patients with parkinsonism and/or
essential tremor compared to control individuals [99]. Later, partial ARSA deficiency was
associated with motor symptoms that are also characteristic of PD, such as tremor, muscle
rigidity, and bradykinesia. Thus, the authors proposed that while decreased enzymatic activity
is not the primary cause of parkinsonism, it could trigger the development of symptoms when
combined with other genetic and/or environmental risk factors [100]. With the use of cell- and
nematode models, ARSA deficiency was shown to increase aggregation, secretion, and cell-
to-cell propagation of aSyn [101]. On the contrary, in an in vitro aSyn aggregation assay, the
presence of ARSA inhibited aSyn fibrillization in a dose-dependent manner [101]. Separate
analysis of cytosolic and vesicular fractions of SH-SY5Y cells revealed that despite ARSA
being a lysosomal enzyme, it is (although inactive) present in the cytosol as well [101]. Based
on results of co-immunoprecipitation experiments, cytosolic ARSA was found to interact with
aSyn. The aSyn binding affinity of the putative protective p.N325S variant of the enzyme was
high, whereas the p.L300S variant - resulting in total loss of enzymatic function - showed lower
aSyn binding affinity compared to the wild type protein [101]. Ectopic overexpression of the
12

---PAGE BREAK---

high, but not the low aSyn binding ARSA protein form rescued locomotor behaviour deficits in
a fly model of the disease, and was capable of decreasing aSyn aggregation and release from
ARSA knockout cells [101]. These results suggest that ARSA is not only an important enzyme
in normal lysosomal function, but also serves as a molecular chaperone of aSyn. Thus,
deficiency of the enzyme could contribute to the development of PD pathology not only by
causing lysosomal dysfunction, but also through enhanced aSyn aggregation [101]. Recently,
the importance of ARSA variants, specifically the protective effect of the p.N325S mutation in
PD has been challenged [102, 103]. Thus, studies involving large sample size and functional
analyses are highly warranted to clarify the role of ARSA in PD.
Another example for mutations in enzymes upstream of the ceramide degradation pathway
are variants of acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase), an enzyme which catalyses the conversion
of sphingomyelin to ceramide. It is encoded by the Sphingomyelin Phosphodiesterase 1
(SMPD1) gene, in which mutations cause the LSD Niemann-Pick disease type A and B,
characterized by the accumulation of sphingomyelin in the lysosome [104]. A link between
aSMase and PD was supported when certain SMPD1 gene variants were found in PD and
control cohorts at different frequencies [51, 105-108]. In their recent study, Alcalay et al.
assessed the frequencies of SMPD1 variants in three different study cohorts and reported
association of the p.L302P and 996delC (fsP330) variants with PD among patients of
Ashkenazi-Jewish origin [109]. Furthermore, reduction in enzyme activity was found to be
associated with earlier disease onset. In vitro findings demonstrated that knockout or
knockdown of SMPD1 led to an increase in aSyn levels [109]. Functional analysis of how these
gene variants could affect aSMase revealed that both the p.L302P and fsP330 variants of the
enzyme caused impaired transport of the protein to the lysosome. Furthermore, in silico
structural analysis revealed that the L302P variant is likely to cause the catalytic domain of the
enzyme to unfold [109].
However, not all LSDs can be linked to PD pathology. For some, a connection is controversially
discussed, as seen for example in β-Hexosaminidase (β-HEX) deficiency. It is a member of
the glycosyl hydrolase 20 protein family and, together with the cofactor GM ganglioside
2
13

---PAGE BREAK---

activator protein, catalyses the degradation of terminal N-acetyl hexosamine-containing
molecules such as the ganglioside GM . Mutations in the two subunits of β-HEX (subunit α
2
and β) lead to the accumulation of GM , resulting in GM -gangliosidoses Tay-Sachs (caused
2 2
by variants of the HEXA gene, encoding the α subunit of β-HEX) and Sandhoff disease (caused
by mutations of the HEXB gene, encoding the β subunit). Presence of parkinsonian-like
symptoms have been described in patients suffering from late/adult-onset GM -gangliosidosis
2
[110-113]. Furthermore, accumulation of aSyn in both in vivo models as well as post mortem
brain samples of GM -gangliosidosis patients have been repeatedly reported [98, 114, 115].
2
Elevated β-HEX activity has been reported in CSF and fibroblast samples of PD patients (CSF:
[116]; fibroblasts: [62, 117]), yet not in leukocytes [118]. More recently, a decrease in β-HEX
activity was described in substantia nigra samples of sporadic PD patients when compared to
samples of healthy controls [119]. With this controversy results of β-HEX activity, a clear
connection between GM -gangliosidoses and PD cannot be drawn.
2
Lysosomal integrity and transport equilibrium
Lysosomal proteins are often not directly linked to one single disease, but impose risk factors
for PD, dementia with Lewy bodies, and other neurodegenerative dysfunctions as well [31].
The assembly, structure, and integrity of lysosomes is based on various (membrane) proteins,
which ensure import and export of substrates, communication between lysosomes and other
cell organelles or the cell membrane, signal transduction, pH stability, and many others [120].
Disturbed integrity can influence the entire lysosomal system and provoke aSyn aggregation
or cell death, e.g., by insufficient export of substrates or degraded products, which causes
accumulation of toxic elements in the lysosomes [121].
Lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) with their subtypes 1, 2, and 3, are the
most common membrane proteins correlated to lysosomal integrity and segregation
processes. LAMP-1 and -2 represent 50 % of all lysosomal membrane proteins [122]. Although
their functions are not entirely clear to date, mouse models suggested not only a role in
14

---PAGE BREAK---

maintaining the lysosomal structure, but also autophagic degradation [25]. Especially
interaction and binding of enzyme-bound substrates is often mediated by LAMP-2 crosslinked
with the lysosome-associated Hsc70 heat-shock protein, thereby forming large multimers to
transport substrates into the lysosome. Furthermore, it has high relevance for different
autophagy processes [25, 123]. LAMP-3 is expressed exclusively in dendritic cells and it takes
part in processes such as cell differentiation and cancer development [124, 125]. Mutations
influencing the structure of LAMP-2 lead to the LSD Danon disease, which affects less mental,
but rather muscle and cardiac functions and is discussed to be a glycogen storage disease
[126]. In patients with sporadic PD, the level of LAMP-2 was decreased in brain tissue [123]
and leukocytes [127]. Moreover, PD patients with mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
(LRRK2) – a well described risk factor for sporadic PD – showed decreased LAMP-2
concentrations in CSF [128]. However, the correlation with PD duration and progression, and
the exact correlations with homo- or heterozygote variants remain unclear [129]. As autophagy
is an essential step in degradation of aSyn, dysfunctional LAMP-2 might be indirectly causative
for PD via impaired autophagosomal processes [130, 131].
Membrane proteins often serve as importers or exporters of specific substrates. A reduced
number or a lack of functional exporters can cause accumulation of (toxic) molecules. The P -
5
type ATPase 13A2 (ATP13A2, also known as PARK9) exports zinc and manganese ions [132,
133] as well as polyamines [134, 135]. Accumulation of manganese leads to the
permeabilization of the lysosomal membrane [136] and enhances aSyn aggregation [132].
Polyamines regulate levels of reactive oxygen species, not only affecting lysosomal but also
mitochondrial stress response and toxicity, which furthermore leads to cell death and
neurodegeneration [134, 135]. Mutations of the ATP13A2 gene lead to EOPD and/or Kufor-
Rabek syndrome (KRS) [137-139]. As KRS has a juvenile onset and shows various
neurodegenerative symptoms such as pyramidal dysfunction, spasticity, dementia, and
parkinsonism with fast progression [140, 141], it is often declared as a specific form of EOPD.
Yeast models, animal models, and neuron cultures initially showed that aSyn aggregation and
neurodegeneration can be rescued by expression of wild-type ATP13A2 or its homologues, as
15

---PAGE BREAK---

build-up of toxic manganese levels is inhibited [132]. Mutations in ATP13A2 cause different
types of dysfunctions in neuronal cells: while homozygous mutations (including KRS
mutations) often prevent the correct lysosomal localisation of ATP13A2 and/or lead to its
destabilization, heterozygous mutations are more likely to affect the ATPase activity, thus the
functionality of the exporter [142]. Fibroblasts and dopaminergic neurons from ATP13A2-
deficient PD patients showed altered lysosomal function, resulting in early cell death, as
alteration of the lysosomal pH and permeabilization of the membrane occurred. Maturation and
function of lysosomal cathepsins was impaired, thus aSyn aggregation increased in parallel
with decreased depletion of accumulated toxic substrates [137, 143]. Furthermore, the role of
zinc toxicity is of interest, as an excess of zinc causes glycolytic dysfunctions, which could be
restored by ATP13A2 overexpression and pyruvate supplementation [144]. This example
demonstrates the importance of detailed knowledge about a disease’s pathomechanism, as
possible treatments might depend on the underlying mutations and dysfunctions.
Unlike other lysosomal membrane proteins, the proton-activated transmembrane protein 175
(TMEM175) is expressed in most tissues and highly conserved in all domains of life, serving
as an essential potassium channel. It maintains lysosomal integrity by regulating both pH and
membrane potential, and membrane interaction or fusion [145]. The essential function as an
antagonist (i.e. proton efflux pump) towards vacuolar-type ATPases, which provide proton
influx into the lysosomal cavity, was recently described [146]. By altering the lysosomal pH,
enzymes can lose their catalytic activity or stability (see introduction). Mutations or co-factors
enhancing the activity of TMEM175 go along with increased lysosomal pH, while reduced
activity leads to acidification of the lysosomal lumen [146]. Studies of (neuronal) cell lines with
TMEM175 deficiency revealed a decrease of 20 to 35 % in activity of the lysosomal cathepsins
and GCase. Knockout of TMEM175 also reduced fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes,
thus accumulation of autophagosomal substrates occurred due to insufficient uptake and
degradation by lysosomes. Both effects cause accumulation of aSyn, increasing the risk of
developing PD [147]. In rat primary hippocampus neurons bearing the p.M393T mutation,
dysregulated pH levels, reduced autophagy, and accumulation of aSyn was observed [148].
16

---PAGE BREAK---

Impaired localization of TMEM175 remains to be discussed controversially. Apoptosis
regulators of the Bcl-2 family can directly bind and inhibit TMEM175 function, although the
mechanism is not fully understood. As Bcl-2 itself can be bound and inhibited, TMEM175
activity reduction or enhancement can be controlled and might serve as a therapeutic target
[149].
Vesicular transport of lysosomal enzymes and lysosomal
segregation
Besides full enzymatic activity or functionality, all lysosomal proteins have to be transported at
the right quantity in order to fulfil their proper function in the lysosome. As described above,
most lysosomal enzymes utilize the mannose 6-phosphate transport system to reach the
lysosome. However, for some individual enzymes specialized transport proteins and signals
developed, of which the lysosomal integral membrane protein type-2 (LIMP-2, coded by the
SCARB2 gene) is the best-studied example. It forms a complex with the GD- and PD-
associated enzyme GCase in the ER. This complex is then trafficked through the Golgi
apparatus and into the lysosome [20, 21]. While GCase transport appears to be the primary
function of LIMP-2, recent studies have suggested an involvement of LIMP-2 in cholesterol
transport [150]. A lack or dysfunction of LIMP-2 causes action myoclonus-renal failure
syndrome. Besides renal failure, patients frequently report tremor and other neurological
symptoms [151]. Interestingly, SCARB2 is also a risk gene for PD, most likely acting via the
GCase-aSyn axis [152]. Recent studies suggest that LIMP-2 furthermore acts as an activator
and/or chaperon for GCase, as enhanced GCase activity could be measured in vitro in the
presence of LIMP-2 compared to GCase alone [153, 154]. As a side note, LIMP-2 can also be
expressed at the cell surface and thus also functions as the receptor for coxsackie virus,
causing hand, foot, and mouth disease [155].
Another interesting, yet barely understood protein is the lysosomal cobalamin transport escort
protein (LMBRD1). Beside cobalamin export [156], it forms a complex with the ATP-binding
17

---PAGE BREAK---

cassette protein ABCD4 [157]. Mutations in ABCD4 cause symptoms affecting different
organs, developmental delay, and early death. Mutations in LMBRD1 and ABCD4,
respectively, cause vitamin B deficiency and accumulation of cobalamin in the lysosomes,
12
leading to a lack of homocysteine and methionine [157, 158] and causing the Cobalamin F-
type disease [156]. It was hypothesized that both trafficking from the ER to lysosomes and
proper functionality is only possible after complex formation of both proteins. In parallel,
LMBRD1 fulfils a role in endocytosis by co-localization and co-internalization of the insulin
receptor in the plasma membrane, thus being an essential part of intracellular signalling and
of maintaining homeostasis of glycolipid metabolism [159]. Although no direct genetic link has
been drawn to PD so far, symptoms often affect neuronal tissues, resulting in blindness,
neurological defects, cerebral atrophy, and seizures. Whether or not LMDRB1 is linked to PD
pathology has to be determined in future research.
Next to mention in lysosomal trafficking are cyclin-G-associated kinases (GAKs), which do not
only serve as serine/threonine kinases, but also interact with clathrin adaptors, serving as co-
chaperones for heat shock protein 70. Clathrin is a coating protein essential for lysosomal
formation, endocytosis, and exocytosis. A knockdown of GAK can partially inhibit the
endocytosis of clathrin-coated vesicles, leading to impaired vesicular transport, signal
transmission, or protein recycling [160, 161]. Furthermore, the C-terminal domain binds a pre-
form of CTSD (see chapter “α-Synuclein degradation by lysosomal cathepsins”) for direct
lysosomal sorting [162]. GAK can increase PD risk, as a lack of substrates (kinase activity),
accumulation of aSyn (binding partner for CTSD), and inhibited autophagy (involvement of
clathrin uncoating) can lead to PD-associated symptoms in neuronal and non-neuronal cell
models independently of each other [163].
Membrane proteins playing important roles in vesicle transport and fusion, neuronal
maturation, and many other functions, are the Ras-related proteins (Rab family; reviewed in
[164]). Alteration in almost any member of this family can lead to severe symptoms, e.g., four
of them are associated to neuronal dysfunctions, and Rab39B has been correlated with
18

---PAGE BREAK---

intellectual disabilities and is classified as an EOPD risk factor, as certain mutations cause
destabilization and loss of function in RAB39B proteins [165, 166]. Possible consequences are
aSyn aggregation and Lewy body formation [164].
Characterization of lysosomal enzymes – activity vs. protein levels
Quantification of enzyme activity in patient-derived samples like fibroblasts or blood-derived
samples (plasma, leukocytes, dry blood spots) is a widely used tool for screening and
diagnosis of LSDs. Activity measurements often rely on fluorometric or colorimetric activity
assays using an acidic reaction buffer and a synthetic substrate [167]. For many lysosomal
enzymes, 4-methylumbelliferyl (4-MU) conjugates have been used successfully as substrates
(including the following enzymes from Table 1: GCase, GALC, glycosaminoglycan α-L-
iduronohydrolase, iduronate 2-sulfatase, ARSA/B, N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase, α-L-
fucosidase, α-galactosidase A, HEXA/B, neuraminidase 1, sulfamidase, acid
sphingomyelinase) [168-181]. For lysosomal cathepsins, fluorogenic peptides with enzyme
specific cleavage sites can be used and fluorometric activity assay kits are commercially
available. In an alternative approach, turnover on non-fluorogenic enzyme substrates can be
measured by using tandem mass spectrometry, allowing increased detection range and
multiplex analyses [182, 183]. For some enzymes (GALC, acid sphingomyelinase, lysosomal
acid lipase), the missing specificity of the 4-MU substrate forces the use of radiolabelled native
substrates, which is used in diagnostics for higher specificity [184].
A downside of activity measurement in whole-cell lysates and peripheral samples is the
disregard for cellular localisation of the target enzyme. Since maturation and activity of
lysosomal enzymes is mediated by acidic pH and other lysosomal enzymes [185], lysis of
whole cells and addition of an acidic reaction buffer in an activity assay might lead to activation
of enzymes that have not undergone full maturation and lysosomal delivery. Therefore, these
assays overlook possible changes in lysosomal trafficking, which is regarded as one of the
major components of PD pathology. This disturbance of lysosomal trafficking and disruption of
19

---PAGE BREAK---

lysosomal functions in midbrain neurons by aSyn was shown in a study by Mazzulli et al. [186],
which encompassed a variety of experimental approaches to investigate lysosomal functions
and trafficking. A pulse-chase experiment using radiolabelled lysine was conducted to
measure protein degradation, allowing quantification of overall lysosomal function in a
broadband approach [186]. In addition, lysosome-specific live cell activity assays of human
midbrain dopamine neurons were performed that showed significantly reduced activity of
CTSB, GCase, β-galactosidase, hexosaminidase, and sulfatase in PD and/or GD patients (at
least half of the controls’ activity or less). Noteworthy, while lysosome-specific GCase activity
was significantly reduced under high aSyn conditions, total cellular GCase activity was
unaffected, demonstrating the discrepancy between whole-cell and lysosome-specific activity.
Finally, western blot analyses and immunofluorescence staining confirmed the disturbance in
lysosomal transport of hydrolases in presence of pathological aSyn conformers [186]. This
study is a good example on how to assess lysosomal enzyme function while considering the
crucial trafficking component. A comprehensive methodological guide to studying trafficking
and activity of lysosomal enzymes in human iPSC-derived neuronal models has also been
published by Cuddy and Mazzulli and we encourage resorting to this for guidance when
addressing similar scientific questions [187].
It is important to note that enzyme activity and protein levels are not interchangeable readouts,
especially in the context of disease-associated genetic variants that affect an enzyme’s
expression and/or activity. Thus, both readouts should be considered to obtain a full picture.
In general, quantification of lysosomal protein levels can be done, for example, via western
blot analysis [57], or mass spectrometry [60]. In PD/LSD research, quantification of misfolded
proteins, protein oligomers, and protein aggregates also play key roles, which might require
more complex immunoassays such as different types of ELISA, fluorescence microscopy or
spectroscopy, microbeads, radiolabelling, or others [188]. In addition to information on protein
abundance, these methods can also provide qualitative information on protein processing and
maturation through analysis of maturation-specific band patterns [186, 189], or by
characteristic peptide fingerprints [60]. Enrichment or purification of lysosomes from cell
20

---PAGE BREAK---

homogenate via subcellular fractionation [76] or immunoprecipitation [190] can be utilized prior
to western blotting to separate lysosomal and non-lysosomal species, allowing more detailed
analysis of intracellular trafficking. Additional information about maturation state can also be
obtained by EndoH and PNGaseF digest of western blot samples. These enzymes selectively
cleave pre-Golgi and post-Golgi N-linked glycans, respectively, providing additional insight into
the maturation state and subcellular distribution of the target enzyme [187].
Lysosomal enzymes as biomarkers and diagnostic tools in PD
To date, a clinical diagnosis of PD is based on the presence of characteristic neurological
symptoms [191]. While a molecular diagnosis was previously only possible post mortem by
examination of the brain, recent advances in the understanding of molecular mechanisms have
sparked the search for diagnostic markers in biosamples of PD patients. So far, most of these
biomarkers focus on aSyn as the hallmark molecule of PD. However, as touched upon in the
previous chapter, activity measurements of lysosomal enzymes are well-established
diagnostic tools for LSDs, and with the increasing evidence of connections between LSDs and
PD, changes in lysosomal enzymes could potentially function as a biomarker for PD diagnosis
or prognosis.
Due to the tight involvement of GCase in PD pathology, studies have explored GCase activity
in biofluids as a potential biomarker for PD. Several studies analysed CSF and found
decreased GCase activity in PD patients [116, 192-194]. Importantly, while GCase activity was
most decreased in GBA-PD patients and correlated with the severity of the GBA1 mutation
[193], even PD patients without GBA1 mutations exhibited reduced CSF GCase activity [194].
In addition to GCase activity, a reduced activity of α- and β-mannosidase [192] and CTSD
[194] was reported. Changes in the activity of β-HEX varied between the studies, with two
studies showing a slight, statistically non-significant decrease [192, 194] while another study
reported an increase in activity [116]. There is, however, a conflicting study by van Dijk et al.
that found no changes in GCase, β-HEX, β-mannosidase and CTSD, but increased β-
21

---PAGE BREAK---

galactosidase and cathepsin E activity [59]. This study also raises the important point that CSF
sample are generally obtained for diagnostic purposes from individuals with neurological
symptoms. So, while the control samples do not stem from patients diagnosed with PD, they
do not necessarily reflect “healthy” controls. Nonetheless, it appears that there are alterations
in lysosomal enzymes, namely GCase, in CSF of PD patients. The studies mentioned here
suggest that while a single lysosomal enzyme might not be a sufficiently accurate biomarker
for PD in CSF, looking at a set of lysosomal enzymes could improve specificity of a molecular
PD diagnosis.
Besides looking at CSF, great efforts have been made in identifying PD biomarkers in biofluids
that are easier to obtain, as they are less invasive, such as urine samples or peripheral blood.
A proteomics analysis of urine samples by Virreira Winter et al. found a dysregulation of
lysosomal proteins (e.g., CTSB, HEXA, HEXB, GALC), but only in PD patients harbouring the
LRRK2 p.G2019S mutation [195]. In peripheral blood, Alcalay et al. showed that GCase activity
in dried blood spots of GBA-PD, LRRK2-PD, and sporadic PD patients was decreased
compared to controls. Furthermore, GCase activity correlated with disease duration,
suggesting that lower GCase activity led to faster disease progression [196].
The most exciting advance in recent biomarker research has been the exploitation of
extracellular vesicles (EVs). These vesicles are secreted by cells for communication, cargo
transport or to get rid of cellular waste (see [197] for a comprehensive review on EVs). Thus,
they carry cell type-specific cargo and surface markers. Importantly, EVs can pass the blood-
brain barrier (BBB), allowing the isolation of brain-derived EVs from peripheral blood. While
the idea of looking at brain-derived EVs in blood originated in the AD field [198], the immense
potential of this new approach for PD has been demonstrated by a study of Kluge et al., in
which brain-derived pathological aSyn was detected in blood samples of PD patients via
isolation of neuronal exosomes [199]. It remains to be seen whether neuronal exosomes can
also shed more light on the dysregulation of lysosomal enzymes in the living brains of PD
patients and whether detecting these changes can serve as a reliable, consistent diagnostic
or prognostic biomarker standard for PD.
22

---PAGE BREAK---

Lysosomal dysfunction and aSyn in LSD and PD models
To study neurodegenerative diseases, animal models often serve as platform to reflect human
pathology as close as possible. One of the earliest PD models was a 6-Hdydroxydopamine (6-
OHDA, a dopamine analogue) induced neurotoxin rat model, which leads to PD development
after metabolization of the 6-ODHA in neurons and mitochondrial dysfunction [200]. Also other
toxin-induced models are in use, provoking accumulation of reactive oxygen species for
example by plant or fungi toxins, and further causing aSyn inclusions [201]. 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced models which reflect most of the PD hallmarks
except Lewy body formation [202] currently serve as a gold standard in (toxin-induced) animal
models for PD. Instead of toxins, also viral vectors are used, for instance to initiate over-
expression of aSyn, leading to significant loss of dopaminergic neurons [203-205]. However,
both systems often fail to reflect the broad spectrum of PD pathology and malfunction-
consequence-circles caused by impaired protein functionalities. Genetic models can target
specific proteins and pathways, and many examples and models exist especially for aSyn
aggregation in the brain, either by altering the levels of aSyn degrading enzymes like
cathepsins [54] or by the expression of mutated aSyn genes like the variants p.A30P and
p.A53T [206]. LRRK2 overexpression mouse models could provoke different PD-correlated
effects, such as altered motor and behavioural performance, decreased proliferation and
survival rates of cells, or reduced neurotransmission in dopaminergic neurons [207-210], which
helps in understanding and treating PD forms provoked exclusively by LRRK2 mutations.
Since LSDs are normally caused by more specific cellular malfunctions, i.e. single proteins, it
is easier to establish suitable animal models for these than for multifactorial disorders like PD.
Two prominent examples are the previously mentioned CTSD-deficient NCL10 mouse [54] and
a mouse model for GD carrying distinct GBA1 mutations [211] or gene deficiency [212].
To date, no in vivo model can fully recapitulate the complexity of PD. Mechanisms in neuronal
cell function like the dopamine metabolism [213] as well as aSyn aggregation [214, 215] differ
between humans and rodents. For instance, murine neurons often lack hallmark symptoms
23

---PAGE BREAK---

like Lewy body-like fibrils [216] or behaviour and motor phenotypes [217]. Toxin-induced
models can cause adverse or stronger effects than aimed for as they might affect not only the
target protein or cellular component. When establishing aSyn induced animal models, the
promoter has to be chosen carefully and differentiated between human or rodent aSyn
expression.
Thus, use of animal models has to be evaluated with caution, yet they still provide a very
valuable tool to study single, straight defined biochemical or molecular questions about
mechanisms in LSD or PD pathology and correlations to lysosomal (dys)functions [218, 219].
To bridge the knowledge gaps of human cellular processes in PD, new methods emerged and
improved over the last decades. A powerful approach is the use of induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), which allows PD patient-derived cells to be re-programmed into dopaminergic
neurons [220], enabling further characterisation of lysosomal function in living neuronal cells
instead of patient derived post mortem brain tissue and/or CSF samples. Dopaminergic
neurons can be maintained in vitro over months and in vivo survival was proven in mice, rats,
and monkeys [220]. This approach also allows a more detailed analysis of cellular/lysosomal
function in neuronal cells both in the presence and the absence of aSyn. Notably, a wide variety
of genetic backgrounds can be analysed, ranging from high impact mutations in the aSyn gene
SNCA [221] to genetic risk factors such as variants of GBA1 [222] and LRRK2 [223]. Besides
iPSCs equipped with down- or dysregulated proteins, multiplication of certain (risk) genes is
another tool for studying the consequences of altered protein levels and function. As an
example, both the duplication and triplication of the SNCA locus was found to increase activity
of caspases, promote protein aggregation, oxidative stress, and cell death [221, 224]. The
analysis of GD or PD patient derived iPSCs heterozygous for GBA1 mutations helped to prove
the accumulation of glucosylceramide as a consequence of the gene variants, which was then
linked to aSyn aggregation, impaired lysosomal or autophagosomal function, and dysregulated
calcium homeostasis [222]. Controlling cell differentiation gets more and more precise and
robust, e.g. by exposure to neurotoxins like MPP+ [225] or retinoic acid [226], so that symptoms
24

---PAGE BREAK---

of PD can be provoked in iPSCs. Several iPSCs models have been established as a good
base for proteomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics [227].
Most intriguingly, iPSC technology allows individualized, per-patient characterization of
neuronal pathology, which is particularly important for the understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying those EOPD cases, which lack common PD risk factors [228]. On one
hand, this enables the exploration of shared pathomechanisms of patients with different
genetic background, and also offers the potential of paving the way towards more personalized
treatment and diagnostic strategies in the future [229, 230]. On the other hand, iPSCs models
highly depend on the genetic background of each line and need a clear association to a genetic
risk factor to interpret changes in cell or organelle morphology, expression levels, or
transduction. Furthermore, for PD studies the use of mature dopaminergic cells is crucial, yet
functional and cellular properties can drastically change over time [231], and two-dimensional
cell cultures can neither fully reflect functional three-dimensional brain tissue nor organic
implements like the BBB [232]. Attempts of using co-cultures with different cell types to mimic
the physiological conditions in PD progression were done, e.g. demonstrating that astrocytes
are crucial for regulation and maintenance of neurons, neuronal networks, and
neurotransmitters [233-235]. Different methods for using iPSC to study LSDs and PD have
been reviewed in [236].
Therapeutic potential of lysosomes and lysosomal enzymes
25

---PAGE BREAK---

Figure 2 The increasing evidence of shared pathomechanisms between LSDs and PD suggest
that therapeutic interventions established or currently under development for the treatment of
LSDs hold the potential of being suitable for the treatment of PD as well. These interventions
can be grouped as methods aiming and replacing/substituting the faulty or missing enzyme
(enzyme replacement and gene therapy approaches), enhancing residual enzyme activity with
the use of small molecular active site or allosteric regulators (pharmacological chaperon
therapy), adjusting the substrate levels of enzymes with reduced activity (substrate reduction
therapy), and adjuvant therapies. The icons next to the exemplary compound names indicate
whether the drug has been evaluated in in vitro (tissue culture icon) or in vivo (mouse icon)
models of PD, or entered clinical trial(s) (hospital icon). The red checkmark icon indicates if a
compound has been approved for the treatment of an LSD.
Abbreviations: AVV, adenovirus vector; GBA, β-glucocerebrosidase (gene); GCase, β-
glucocerebrosidase (protein); CTSD, cathepsin D; TFEB, transcription factor EB; FTI, farnesyl
transferase inhibitor; aSyn, α-Synuclein.
26

---PAGE BREAK---

(Figure created with BioRender.com.)
As a result of intensive research in the field of both LSDs and neurodegenerative diseases,
increasing number of genetic alterations and changes in the molecular level have been
identified, which suggest similar pathomechanisms underlying the two disease groups.
However, important differences between PD and LSDs should not be overlooked: LSDs
frequently present severe systemic symptoms affecting organs other than the CNS. In light of
this, therapeutic approaches often target treating and/or alleviating symptoms that are caused
by the dysfunction of peripheral organs. Another significant difference between LSDs and PD
is, while the former ones are generally results of gene mutations manifesting frequently early
in life, the latter has a more diverse aetiology and it is more associated with advanced ages.
Nonetheless, if a therapeutic approach tackles a molecular mechanism in LSDs which
decreases ongoing neurodegeneration, it could hold great potential for the treatment of
neurodegenerative disorders as well, including PD.
Still, an obstacle that needs to be overcome in the treatment of PD and neurodegenerative
disorders is the BBB. Worth noting here is that nowadays, a view of PD originating from the
gut is also gaining attention [237]. Clarification of the involvement of the gastrointestinal track
and enteral nervous system in PD could give more insight into the origin of the disease and
lead to the identification and development of new therapies targeting non-brain regions. In the
following description of possible therapeutic approaches targeting lysosomal
enzymes/functions, we focus on PD while only mentioning selected types of established LSD
treatments. For a more detailed view, we call the readers´ attention to recent reviews on the
topic [238, 239].
The interventions used or attempted for the treatment of LSDs can be grouped into four
methods: i) replacing/substituting faulty enzymes with functioning enzymes using enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT) and gene therapy approaches; ii) modification of enzyme activity
with the use of small molecules targeting the enzyme’s active site or as allosteric regulators,
i.e. pharmacological chaperon therapy (PCT); iii) adjustment of substrate levels to reduce an
enzyme’s activity, i.e. substrate reduction therapy (SRT); and adjuvant therapies (see Figure
27

---PAGE BREAK---

2). In theory, either of these ways can be a reasonable approach for PD treatment as well. An
overview of novel as well as potential therapeutic strategies for PD targeting the lysosome can
be found in the following.
Enzyme replacement therapies (ERTs)
The first ERT was approved for the treatment of GD in 1991 [240, 241]. Since that time, ERTs
for more than ten LSDs have been adopted or are currently under clinical trials [242-244]. This
therapy type is considered as a standard treatment for multiple LSDs; however, it has certain
limitations. These are high cost of recombinant enzyme production, risk of infection due to
repeated application, and the risk of eliciting immune responses [36]. A further limitation of
such therapies is that enzymes – produced regularly by the use of recombinant DNA
technology, frequently in modified forms – are large molecules unable to cross the BBB, thus
their application is often limited for the treatment of non-neurological symptoms [36].
A possible approach for overcoming the problem of BBB penetrance is to deliver the
recombinant enzyme directly into the CSF. Possible routes for this are the
intracerebroventricular and intrathecal enzyme delivery [36, 239]. Direct enzyme delivery has
been recently approved for the treatment of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2) [239].
CLN2 is a form of Batten’s disease, caused by the deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme
tripeptidyl peptidase 1. Intraventricular application of a recombinant tripeptidyl peptidase 1
proenzyme, cerliponase alfa (Brineura®), resulted in diminished decline in motor and language
skills in children suffering from CLN2 [245]. The approval of cerliponase alfa for the treatment
of CLN2 in 2017 [239] demonstrates the potential of this therapeutic approach, and gives hope
for the success of applying direct enzyme delivery into the CNS for the treatment of other
neurological disorders as well. However, intracerebroventricular and intrathecal enzyme
delivery is not without risk. Adverse effects can include malfunctioning of the intraventricular
reservoir and leakage, and even life-threatening infections [245]. Thus, regular medical control
and high level of patient compliance are essential. As an alternative approach, an ongoing
28

---PAGE BREAK---

clinical trial [NCT04370665] is exploring deliberate disturbance of the BBB as a way to deliver
ERT to the brain.
Gene therapy
Another method to reconstruct a functional enzyme could be by establishing an endogenous
source by the delivery of a copy of the gene coding the functional protein. Gene therapy
methods involve both in vivo and ex vivo approaches: the former utilizes a viral vector to carry
the transgene into the target cells, while in the case of ex vivo gene therapy patient derived
cells are genetically modified in vitro, and the altered cells are then re-implanted into the
patients [36]. Transfer of a transgene/genetic modifier to the CNS poses a great challenge.
Similar to ERTs, a possible way to overcome the limited access of the BBB, is to conduct gene
transfer directly to the brain which has been applied in clinical trials for the treatment of various
LSDs, such as mucopolysaccharidosis, metachromatic leukodystrophy, NCL, and GD (for a
detailed review see [246]).
Results of pre-clinical studies suggest that gene therapy targeting restoration of
impaired/defective lysosomal enzyme function has its potential in the treatment of PD as well.
Intracerebral adenovirus vector (AVV) mediated GBA1 gene delivery in in vivo murine models
(aSyn overexpressing mice and a rat model in which selective dopaminergic neuron loss was
induced by AVV mediated delivery of the p.A53T mutant aSyn) ameliorated aSyn accumulation
in the striatum and substantia nigra of the animals [247]. In a more recent study using the
A53T-SCNA transgenic mouse model, Morabito and colleagues demonstrated that
systematically administered AVV carrying the GBA1 transgene resulted in increased GCase
expression in the CNS, which was accompanied by reduction of aSyn pathology [248].
Among the limitations of gene therapy approaches is that the knowledge of genetic background
of the targeted disease is prerequisite in order to correct it. Since LSDs are usually monogenic
diseases, they are promising targets for such interventions [249]. In contrast, PD is a
multifactorial disease and pathogenic/disease causing mutation of a single gene can be
identified only in a small percentage of the cases. In order for a gene therapy approach to be
29

---PAGE BREAK---

viable, understanding the exact pathomechanisms and genetic variations on an individual
basis is essential.
Pharmacological chaperone therapies (PCTs)
An innovative approach for correcting enzyme deficiency is to use so-called pharmacological
chaperones. Endogenous chaperones play a crucial role in stabilizing protein conformation,
preventing protein misfolding and aggregation, thus maintaining protein function. Incorrectly
folded and/or unstable proteins are detected by the quality control systems of the cells and are
marked for degradation. Missense mutations in lysosomal enzymes can impact the structure
of the protein, resulting in misfolding and consequent impairment in its activity and/or trafficking
to the lysosome [250, 251]. Application of pharmacological chaperones can enable the
stabilization of these proteins, thus preventing their premature degradation and facilitating their
transport to the lysosomes and biological activity [250].
A great advantage of PCTs is that they can utilize small molecule drugs that are applicable
orally and are capable of crossing the BBB [36]. However, since this approach targets the
endogenous enzyme, it can be only applied in patients with clearly defined mutations [252]. A
further aspect that needs to be considered is the possible interaction of a pharmacological
chaperone with the active site of a protein, thereby serving as a competitive inhibitor. In order
to avoid this, development of compounds binding outside of the catalytic domains is favourable
[36, 253].
The high prevalence of GBA1 mutations among PD patients puts GCase in the spotlight of PD
research. Various molecules have emerged as promising candidates for modifying GCase
activity in PD, however, most of them have only been evaluated in pre-clinical studies so far.
Among these compounds are new developments, such as NCGC00188758 [254], NCGC607
[255], and S-181 [256], all small-molecule GCase activators. Studies involving iPSC models
showed that all three compounds successfully enhanced GCase activity and decreased aSyn
pathology.
30

---PAGE BREAK---

Another well-known and commonly used GCase-modulating drug is the expectorant ambroxol.
Pre-clinical studies have been utilizing various in vitro models, i.e., GBA-mutant PD patients
derived fibroblasts [257], GD fibroblasts [258], GD and GBA-PD patient derived fibroblasts [62,
259], and mouse cortical neurons [260]. Additionally, in vivo models, i.e., human aSyn
overexpressing and heterozygous murine L444P-GBA expressing mice [261], human WT,
N370S-GBA, and L444P-GBA expressing Drosophila [259], and PD, GD, and GBA-PD patient
derived human macrophages [262] showed that ambroxol increases both protein expression
and activity of GCase. These effects were accompanied by a reduction of aSyn and
phosphorylated aSyn levels and a decrease in the loss of dopaminergic neurons [263]. These
promising findings led to a phase II clinical trial conducted between January of 2017 and April
of 2018 (Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT02941822). The findings indicate that ambroxol is
brain penetrant and results in increased aSyn and GCase protein levels in the CSF.
Furthermore, the treatment was well tolerated and no serious adverse effects were reported
[264].
Substrate reduction therapies (SRTs)
A further mean by which excess accumulation of toxic metabolites can be prevented is via the
inhibition of a substrate’s production [36]. This is the goal of substrate reduction therapies
(SRTs). SRTs have various advantages over ERTs. First, they are more likely to be BBB
penetrant, enabling better treatment of CNS-related symptoms. Second, oral availability and
non-immunogenicity oppose only small impact on quality of life and require less patient
compliance compared to ERTs [36, 265].
Examples for SRTs are drugs approved for the treatment of GD and Niemann–Pick type C
disease: the imino sugar miglustat (Zavesca®) and the ceramide analogue eliglustat
(Cerdelga) [266, 267]. Miglustat and eliglustat are inhibitors of glucosylceramide synthase, an
enzyme responsible for the formation of glucocerebroside (glucosylceramide) [267]. But even
though miglustat is capable of crossing the BBB [267, 268], it did not improve the neurological
symptoms of patients suffering from GD significantly [269].
31

---PAGE BREAK---

Results of Zunke et al. [270] suggest that decrease of glucosylceramide levels is also a
promising approach against aSyn pathology. In vitro studies showed that the interaction of
aSyn and glucosylceramide leads to a structural conversion of the protein into a pathogenic
conformation. These high-molecular weight aSyn species were found to be capable of
recruiting and converting soluble forms of the protein into insoluble aggregates, and induced
cellular degeneration. Decreasing glucosylceramide levels either by the glucosylceramide
synthase inhibitor eligustat or via a small molecule GCase activator, 758, restored the
physiological conformers of the protein and decreased aSyn pathology [270].
Ibiglustat (also named Venglustat or Genz-682452) is another brain-penetrant SRT compound
developed with the aim of treating CNS-related symptoms of LSDs. It was also evaluated as a
potential treatment for PD, acting via inhibition of glucosylceramide synthase to lower
glucosylceramide levels and thus slow aSyn aggregation [267]. In a phase II clinical trial
involving early-stage GBA-PD patients (MOVES-PD, NCT02906020) ibiglustat treatment
resulted in diminished plasma and CSF glucosylceramide levels. However, the study had to
be terminated due to adverse clinical outcomes [263]. Nonetheless, the brain penetrability of
SRTs gives hope and warrants for being included in further research of PD treatments.
Although so far it has been only tested in pre-clinical experiments, treatment of
GbaD409V/D409V and A53T–SNCA transgenic mice (mouse models of GD and
PD/synucleinopathy, respectively) with GZ667161 resulted in decreased glucosylceramide
and glucosylsphingosine levels in the CNS, slowed hippocampal aSyn accumulation and
ameliorated memory and cognitive deficits in the animals [271].
Adjuvant therapies
Adjuvant therapies, which target secondary pathways affected in the disease, hold the
potential of improving life quality and slowing down disease progression of patients with a
variety of pathomechanisms. Since aSyn accumulation and the consequent cell loss are
pathological hallmarks of PD, but not necessarily caused by direct SNCA mutations but rather
side-effects of other dysfunctional proteins, any reduction of aSyn aggregate formation could
32

---PAGE BREAK---

be a viable therapeutic approach. CTSD is a promising target for preventing aSyn
accumulation, since findings of studies using mice and Caenorhabditis elegans models
showed that CTSD plays a pivotal role in its degradation. Deficiency of the enzyme was
reported to be associated with aSyn accumulation, while increased expression of CTSD was
found to have a protective effect against aSyn induced toxicity (for a detailed review see [243,
272]).
Ykt6, a soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive-factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE)
protein, has recently emerged as a potential candidate for intercepting aSyn related pathology.
In their study, Cuddy et al. [273] demonstrated that under metabolic stress, ykt6 moves into
the membranes from the cytosol, thus promoting hydrolase trafficking and lysosomal activity.
Blocking its farnesylation with the small molecule farnesyl transferase inhibitor LNK-754
increased ykt6 activity and enhanced trafficking of lysosomal GCase, and reduced aSyn
pathology in PD patient iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons and a DASYN53 mouse model of
the disease.
A further promising adjuvant therapeutic approach is the modulation of TFEB. As discussed
earlier, TFEB is a master regulator of lysosomal function, and controls lysosomal biogenesis
and autophagy. Up-regulation of TFEB has been shown to have beneficial effects in various in
vivo and in vitro models of PD. Torra et al. [274] demonstrated that AAV mediated
overexpression of TFEB in substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons of the MPTP induced
mouse model of PD activated pro-survival pathways, and prevented cell loss induced by the
toxin. AVV mediated TFEB overexpression in rats simultaneously overexpressing human aSyn
protected both dopaminergic neurons and striatal terminals, which was proposed to be due to
the reduction of aSyn oligomer formation and an increase in processing of autophagosomes
[28]. In a study using aSyn overexpressing human neuroglioma cells, both genetic
overexpression and 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin induced pharmacological activation of
TFEB decreased accumulation of aggregated aSyn via increasing the autophagic clearance
of the protein [275].
33

---PAGE BREAK---

Perspective – Challenges in LSD and PD diagnosis and treatment
The development of (EO)PD linked to mutations leading to the malfunction of a single protein
occurs only in a small percentage of patients. However, lysosomal transport, sorting, and the
whole process of substrate recycling is a fragile system with plenty of interaction partners and
converging mechanisms. The analysis of different LSDs in the last years have taught us
valuable lessons and revealed mechanistic insight into lysosomal dysfunction in PD [276].
Nevertheless, there are still some major shortcomings that need to be solved to drive
lysosomal research not only in the context of PD, but also in other neurodegenerative diseases.
Currently, PD is diagnosed after the first clinical symptoms have already occurred, however,
by that time neurodegenerative processes have already led to the loss of about 70 % of
dopaminergic neurons [277]. Thus, reliable and standardized clinical approaches are needed
for the recognition of the disease at early stage. One approach could be the detection of
aggregated aSyn from blood samples as demonstrated recently [199]. Another possibility
would include the development and use of highly specific substrates against lysosomal
enzymes for the quantification of altered enzymatic activity, e.g., in human derived fibroblasts
or leukocytes. As around 75 % of LSDs are due to defects of lysosomal hydrolases [278],
increasing the number and specificity of substrates to evaluate enzymatic activity would be
one goal over the next years. However, evaluation of the activity of individual enzymes can
only give a glimpse into the complex degradation network in the lysosome. Delivery of
lysosomal proteins as well as substrates to the lysosome is just as crucial for lysosomal
function as the integrity of the enzymes, however, signals for binding and release of protein-
protein or protein-substrate interactions are mostly unknown [279]. Moreover, biochemical and
biomechanical feedback loops within the lysosome can provoke more than one factor to
increase neurodegeneration (see graphical abstract), e.g. aSyn aggregation can be enhanced
by many other dysfunctional proteins, even without the SNCA gene being affected [280].
Development of more complex, yet native-like cell systems and organoids are urgently needed
to understand lysosomal dysfunction in the PD disease context. These assays will need to
include genetic modifications of more than one risk factor, with specific read-out tools at the
34

---PAGE BREAK---

same time. A cross-correlation and -evaluation between genetic analyses (demonstrating the
cause of a protein dysfunction) and activity assays (demonstrating the output or consequence
of this dysfunction) or other analysing methods will help to elucidate networks and interactions
and offer the possibility of identifying the key players in the pathomechanisms of lysosomal
disorders.
The final goal should be to establish translational approaches and clinical trials to transfer the
knowledge from in vitro and in vivo models to patients, since this could help to identify
lysosomal dysfunction preferentially in the prodromal phase of the diseases. While various
LSDs present symptoms of neurodegeneration and/or parkinsonism, in some cases the
genetic and/or molecular background that is common with PD has not been identified up to
today. However, one might ask the question, should a disease be defined by its symptoms, or
by the underlying pathomechanisms? As for those cases with a described shared
pathomechanism of LSDs and PD, the realization of numerous common mechanisms could
pose the question: could (at least some of) these storage disorders be considered as a
prodromal phase of PD, or PD with onset at a young age? The Kufor-Rabek syndrome could
serve as an example in this regard, since it is often considered as a form of EOPD, but also as
an LSD [141, 281]. Additionally, some genetic variations can either lead to an LSD or PD,
respectively, depending on their homo- or heterozygous presence as well as the impact of the
individual mutation on protein function, as shown for GBA1 [62] and GALC [89]. Hence
identifying clear differentiations or convergences of LSDs and PD is difficult and would go out
of the scope of this review. We believe, however, that further research focusing on unravelling
the similarities between LSDs and PD is highly warranted, as it will offer valuable information
from which both fields of LSDs and neurodegenerative diseases are going to benefit. This
would not only hold the potential of preventing irreversible neurodegenerative harm, but also
of identifying the best treatment option for every patient individually.
35

---PAGE BREAK---

Table 1: Overview of lysosomal and lysosome-associated proteins correlated to LSDs and PD
Legend: Overview of proteins in lysosomes or lysosomal membranes, correlated to LSDs, PD, or other neurodegenerative disorders. Some proteins
are known under more names than listed and not all associated diseases, e.g. different types of cancer, are mentioned here. The enzymes are sub-
divided by their cellular localization and function as mentioned in the text, yet not all proteins of this table are explained in detail in this review. Genes
are listed by alphabetic order and are highlighted in grey if an association with PD exists.
α-Synuclein degradation by lysosomal cathepsins
Gene Protein name(s) Functions Consequences of dysfunction Disease name REF
name
CTSB Cathepsin B Cysteine protease; co-factor for Reduced activity of several proteases; AD, PD [52,
other proteases’ activity (e.g. associated with brain ageing 282]
Cathepsin D); autophagy
CTSD Cathepsin D Aspartate protease, degradation Accumulation of toxic protein Congenital neuronal [41,
of long-lived proteins incl. growth aggregates ceroid lipofuscinosis 51,
factors and aSyn type 10 (NCL10), AD, 282,
PD 283]
CTSL Cathepsin L Cysteine protease; association Upregulated by mitochondrial stress, [284]
with the activation of NF-kappa B; leading to altered distribution and
autophagy; protein degradation increased autophagy and
dopaminergic neuron death;
increased levels in PD
LGMN Legumain, asparagine Cysteine protease; cleavage of Upregulated due to ageing and in AD [285,
endopeptidase (AEP) tau proteins and amyloid 286]
precursor proteins; part of
immune system and programmed
cell death
Dysfunctional substrate cleaving enzymes and impaired metabolism
Gene Protein name(s) Functions Consequences of dysfunction Disease name REF
name
36

---PAGE BREAK---

ARSA Arylsulfatase A, Degradation of cerebroside 3- Accumulation of sulfatides Metachromatic [287]
cerebroside-sulfatase sulfate; activated by saposin B leukodystrophy
ARSB Arylsulfatase B Degradation of dermatan sulfate Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Maroteaux-Lamy [288,
and chondroitin sulfate syndrome 289]
ASAH1 Acid ceramidase Degradation (and build-up) of Accumulation of ceramides causing Farber disease, AD, PD [51,
(aCDase), N- ceramides curvilinear tubular structures 290]
acylsphingosine
amidohydrolase 1
FUCA1 α-L-fucosidase Hydrolysis of α-L-fucoside Accumulation of fucoside and glycan Fucosidosis, chronic [291,
structures autoimmune and 292]
inflammation disorders
in children
GALC Galactocerebro- Hydrolysis of galactosylceramide, Accumulation of galactosylceramide; Krabbe disease, PD [51,
sidase, psychosine and and psychosine, resulting in 52,
galactosylceramidase monogalactosyldiglycerid demyelination due to apoptosis of 89,
myelin-forming cells 92,
293]
GALNS N- Hydrolysis of chondroitin sulfate Accumulation of glycosaminoglycan Morquio syndrome [294]
acetylgalactosamine- and keratan sulfate and glycan structures
6-sulfatase
GBA1 β-Glucocerebrosidase Hydrolysis of glucosylceramide Accumulation of glucocerebroside GD, PD [70,
(GCase) 295,
296]
GLA α-galactosidase A (α- Hydrolysis of glycolipids and Accumulation of glycosphingolipids Fabry disease [297,
Gal A) glycoproteins 298]
GNS N-acetylglucosamine- Hydrolysis of keratan sulfate and Accumulation of heparan and keratan Sanfilippo syndrome [299]
6-sulfatase heparin/heparan sulfate sulphate (MPS IIID)
GUSB β-glucuronidase Hydrolysis of chondroitin sulfate, Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Sly syndrome (MPS [93,
dermatan sulfate, and heparan VII), PD 300]
sulfate
HEXA β-Hexosaminidase Hydrolysis of N-acetly-D- Accumulation of G gangliosides; Tay-Sachs disease [116,
M2
subunit α hexosamines and G altered levels in PD 119,
M2
gangliosides with subunit β 301]
37

---PAGE BREAK---

HEXB β-Hexosaminidase Hydrolysis of N-acetly-D- Accumulation of G gangliosides; Sandhoff disease [116,
M2
subunit β hexosamines and G altered levels in PD 119,
M2
gangliosides with subunit α 302]
IDS Iduronate 2-sulfatase Degradation of heparan sulfate Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Hunter syndrome [303,
and dermatan sulfate 304]
IDUA Glycosaminoglycan α- Hydroysis of α-L-iduronosidic Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Hurler syndrome, [305]
L-iduronohydrolase, linkages in glycosaminoglycans Scheie syndrome
iduronidase dermatan and heparan sulfate
NAGA α-N- Glycoside hydrolase; Excretion of glycoproteins Schindler diseases type [306,
acetylgalactosamini- deglycosylation of Gc proteins I and II, Kanzaki 307]
dase, nagalase disease
NAGLU α-N-acetylglucosa- Hydrolysis of N-acetyl-D- Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Sanfilippo syndrome [308,
minidase glucosamine and UDP-N- (MPS IIIB), PD 309]
acetylglucosamine
NEU1 Neuraminidase 1, Cleavage of sialic acid in Accumulation of glycosaminoglycans Glycoproteinosis, [310]
sialidase-1 glycoproteins and glycolipids; Sialidosis (ML I)
heterotrimeric complex with β-
galactosidase (β-gal) and
cathepsin A
SGSH N-sulphoglucosamine Hydrolysis of N-sulfo-D- Accumulation of heparan sulfate Sanfilippo syndrome [308]
sulphohydrolase, glucosamine (MPS IIIA)
sulfamidase
SMPD1 Sphingomyelin Hydrolysis of sphingomyelin Accumulation of sphingomyelin SMPD1-associated [51,
phosphodiesterase1, causing lipid abnormalities in cell Niemann-Pick disease 107,
acid membranes types A and B, p.L320P 311]
sphingomyelinase mutation in PD
(ASMase)
Lysosomal integrity and transport equilibrium
Gene Protein name(s) Functions Consequences of dysfunction Disease name REF
name
ATP6V0C C subunit of the V0 Proteolipid subunit in a vacuolar Inhibition of acidification, inhibition of [312]
domain of V-type proton pump; acidification of autophagy processes, accumulation
lysosomes and endosomes
38

---PAGE BREAK---

proton ATPase 16 of aSyn, stress-induced cell death;
kDa neurodegenerative disorders
ATP13A2 Probable cation- Export of zinc and manganese for Accumulation of toxic metal ions, Kufor-Rabek syndrome, [140,
transporting ATPase cell export or lysosomal aSyn aggregation PD 141,
13A2, PARK9 sequestration 313]
GRN Progranulin (PGRN) Lysosomal glycoprotein and Reduced autophagosomal processes; Batten disease or [314
growth factor in close interaction decreased activity of lysosomal neuronal ceroid -
with cathepsins, GCase, TFEB, enzymes; saposin reduction lipofuscinosis (NCL), 317]
and many others frontotemporal lobar
degeneration with
frontotemporal
dementia and
parkinsonism, AD
LAMP2 Lysosome-associated Integral membrane protein; Altered autophagy and chaperone Danon disease, PD [126,
membrane protein 2 interactions and imports mediated autophagy; accumulation of 129]
substrates from other enzymes aSyn
into the lysosome; essential for
autophagy processes; requires
Hsc70 for regeneration
LRRK2 Leucine-rich repeat Kinase in the cytoplasm, Altered phosphorylation and protein- PD [318
kinase 2, dardarin, interacting with lysosomal and protein interactions, e.g. causing pH -
PARK8 mitochondrial membranes dysregulation; enhanced lysosomal 321]
localization and sorting, e.g. more
autophagy processes
MCOLN1 Mucolipin-1, TRPML1 Transient receptor; potential Iron deficiency in cells/lysosomes; Mucolipidosis type IV [322,
cation channel; iron ion reduces aSyn when activated 323]
transporter
NPC1/2 Niemann-Pick C1 LDL-derived cholesterol exporter Reduced expression of myelin gene Niemann-Pick disease, [324
protein (NPC1), in lysosomal membranes regulatory factor type C -
epididymal secretory PD-association 326]
protein E1 (NPC2) controversially
discussed
SLC17A5 H(+)/sialic acid Sialic acid transporter in Accumulation of sialic acid in the Salla disease, Infantile [51,
cotransporter, sialin lysosomal membranes lysosome/cell Sialic Acid Storage 327,
Disease (ISSD), PD 328]
39

---PAGE BREAK---

TFEB Transcription factor Expression regulation of Expression of inflammatory cytokines; Huntington, PD, AD [329
EB lysosomal hydrolases, membrane accumulation of proteins (aggregates) -
proteins and autophagy-related 331]
proteins, activated by PGC1-α
TMEM175 Transmembrane Lysosomal, proton-activated Altered pH in lysosomes; aSyn Rapid eye movement [52,
protein 175 potassium channel aggregation sleep behaviour 327]
disorder, PD
TMEM76 Transmembrane Lysosomal membrane protein Accumulation of heparin or heparan Sanfilippo syndrome [332]
or protein 76, heparan-α- acetylating heparin and heparan sulfate (MPS IIIC)
HGSNAT glucosaminide N- sulfate, uses acetyl coenzyme A
acetyltransferase
Vesicular transport of lysosomal enzymes and lysosomal segregation
Gene Protein name(s) Functions Consequences of dysfunction Disease name REF
name
GAK Cyclin G-associated Serine/threonine kinase; Impaired interaction with cathepsins PD [333]
kinase, auxilin 2 uncoating clathrin in neurons and aSyn accumulation; reduced
autophagy
M6PR Cation-dependent Transmembrane glycoprotein Insufficient transport of proteins to the [334]
mannose-6- binding mannose-6-phosphate lysosome leading to inefficient
phosphate receptor (M6P) tags on acid hydrolase sequestering of (toxic) cell structures
(CD-MPR) precursors in the Golgi apparatus
to translocate them to the
lysosome
LMBRD1 Limp region 1 Lysosomal membrane protein; Accumulation of cobalamin, lack of Cobalamin F-type [156,
complex formation and homocysteine and methionine disease 157,
translocation of ABCD4 159]
(cobalamin exporter); regulation
of insulin receptor (endocytosis)
Rab family Ras-related proteins, Peripheral membrane proteins; Insufficient vesicular transport and Griscelli syndrome type [164,
members small G-proteins vesicle transport and fusion autophagy, cell stress, protein 2 (Rab27A protein), 165,
aggregation, hereditary sensory 335]
neuropathy type 1C
40

---PAGE BREAK---

(Rab7A protein), EOPD
(Rab39B protein)
SCARB2 Lysosomal Integral Type III transmembrane Insufficient GCase translocation Action myoclonus-renal [20,
Membrane Protein glycoprotein; binding of GCase in and/or activity failure syndrome, GD, 336]
type-2 (LIMP-2) ER and transport to lysosome; PD
catalysing GCase activity
41

---PAGE BREAK---

References
[1] Lesage S, Brice A. Parkinson's disease: from monogenic forms to genetic susceptibility factors.
Human Molecular Genetics. 2009;18:R48-R59.
[2] Deng H, Wang P, Jankovic J. The genetics of Parkinson disease. Ageing Research Reviews.
2018;42:72-85.
[3] Sellbach AN, Boyle RS, Silburn PA, Mellick GD. Parkinson's disease and family history. Parkinsonism
& Related Disorders. 2006;12:399-409.
[4] Jia F, Fellner A, Kumar KR. Monogenic Parkinson's Disease: Genotype, Phenotype, Pathophysiology,
and Genetic Testing. Genes2022.
[5] Warner TT, Schapira AHV. Genetic and environmental factors in the cause of Parkinson's disease.
Annals of Neurology. 2003;53:S16-S25.
[6] Spillantini MG, Schmidt ML, Lee VMY, Trojanowski JQ, Jakes R, Goedert M. α-Synuclein in Lewy
bodies. Nature. 1997;388:839-40.
[7] Luzio JP, Pryor PR, Bright NA. Lysosomes: fusion and function. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology. 2007;8:622-32.
[8] Mellman I, Fuchs R, Helenius A. Acidification of the endocytic and exocytic pathways. Annual Review
of Biochemistry. 1986;55:663-700.
[9] Mellman I. Organelles observed: lysosomes. Science. 1989;244:853-4.
[10] Xu H, Ren D. Lysosomal physiology. Annu Rev Physiol. 2015;77:57-80.
[11] Dawson G, Tsay G. Substrate specificity of human α-l-fucosidase. Archives of Biochemistry and
Biophysics. 1977;184:12-23.
[12] Barrett AJ, McDonald JK. Mammalian proteases: a glossary and bibliography: Academic Press;
1980.
[13] Butor C, Griffiths G, Aronson NN, Varki A. Co-localization of hydrolytic enzymes with widely
disparate pH optima: implications for the regulation of lysosomal pH. Journal of Cell Science.
1995;108:2213-9.
[14] Bainton DF. The discovery of lysosomes. The Journal of cell biology. 1981;91:66s-76s.
[15] Platt FM, Boland B, van der Spoel AC. Lysosomal storage disorders: The cellular impact of
lysosomal dysfunction. Journal of Cell Biology. 2012;199:723-34.
[16] Hille-Rehfeld A. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors in sorting and transport of lysosomal enzymes.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Reviews on Biomembranes. 1995;1241:177-94.
[17] Sahagian GG. The mannose 6-phosphate receptor: function, biosynthesis and translocation.
Biology of the Cell. 1984;51:207-14.
[18] Hoflack B, Kornfeld S. Lysosomal enzyme binding to mouse P388D1 macrophage membranes
lacking the 215-kDa mannose 6-phosphate receptor: evidence for the existence of a second mannose
6-phosphate receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985;82:4428-32.
[19] Pohlmann R, Boeker MWC, von Figura K. The Two Mannose 6-Phosphate Receptors Transport
Distinct Complements of Lysosomal Proteins. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1995;270:27311-8.
[20] Reczek D, Schwake M, Schröder J, Hughes H, Blanz J, Jin X, et al. LIMP-2 Is a Receptor for Lysosomal
Mannose-6-Phosphate-Independent Targeting of β-Glucocerebrosidase. Cell. 2007;131:770-83.
[21] Blanz J, Groth J, Zachos C, Wehling C, Saftig P, Schwake M. Disease-causing mutations within the
lysosomal integral membrane protein type 2 (LIMP-2) reveal the nature of binding to its ligand β-
glucocerebrosidase. Human Molecular Genetics. 2010;19:563-72.
[22] Schneider JL, Cuervo AM. Autophagy and human disease: emerging themes. Current Opinion in
Genetics & Development. 2014;26:16-23.
[23] Mizushima N, Komatsu M. Autophagy: renovation of cells and tissues. Cell. 2011;147:728-41.
[24] Hou X, Watzlawik JO, Fiesel FC, Springer W. Autophagy in Parkinson's Disease. Journal of Molecular
Biology. 2020;432:2651-72.
[25] Eskelinen E-L. Roles of LAMP-1 and LAMP-2 in lysosome biogenesis and autophagy. Molecular
Aspects of Medicine. 2006;27:495-502.
42

---PAGE BREAK---

[26] Plowey ED, Cherra Iii SJ, Liu YJ, Chu CT. Role of autophagy in G2019S-LRRK2-associated neurite
shortening in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. Journal of neurochemistry. 2008;105:1048-56.
[27] Alegre-Abarrategui J, Christian H, Lufino MMP, Mutihac R, Venda LL, Ansorge O, et al. LRRK2
regulates autophagic activity and localizes to specific membrane microdomains in a novel human
genomic reporter cellular model. Human molecular genetics. 2009;18:4022-34.
[28] Decressac M, Mattsson B, Weikop P, Lundblad M, Jakobsson J, Björklund A. TFEB-mediated
autophagy rescues midbrain dopamine neurons from α-synuclein toxicity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2013;110:E1817-E26.
[29] Vitner EB, Platt FM, Futerman AH. Common and Uncommon Pathogenic Cascades in Lysosomal
Storage Diseases. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2010;285:20423-7.
[30] Sun A. Lysosomal storage disease overview. Ann Transl Med. 2018;6:476.
[31] Fraldi A, Klein AD, Medina DL, Settembre C. Brain disorders due to lysosomal dysfunction. Annu
Rev Neurosci. 2016;39:277-95.
[32] Hara T, Nakamura K, Matsui M, Yamamoto A, Nakahara Y, Suzuki-Migishima R, et al. Suppression
of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature. 2006;441:885-9.
[33] Komatsu M, Waguri S, Chiba T, Murata S, Iwata J-i, Tanida I, et al. Loss of autophagy in the central
nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice. Nature. 2006;441:880-4.
[34] Nixon RA. The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nature Medicine. 2013;19:983-
97.
[35] Ghavami S, Shojaei S, Yeganeh B, Ande SR, Jangamreddy JR, Mehrpour M, et al. Autophagy and
apoptosis dysfunction in neurodegenerative disorders. Progress in Neurobiology. 2014;112:24-49.
[36] Parenti G, Medina DL, Ballabio A. The rapidly evolving view of lysosomal storage diseases. EMBO
Mol Med. 2021;13:e12836.
[37] Bennett MC, Bishop JF, Leng Y, Chock PB, Chase TN, Mouradian MM. Degradation of α-Synuclein
by Proteasome. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1999;274:33855-8.
[38] Webb JL, Ravikumar B, Atkins J, Skepper JN, Rubinsztein DC. α-Synuclein Is Degraded by Both
Autophagy and the Proteasome. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2003;278:25009-13.
[39] Cuervo AM, Stefanis L, Fredenburg R, Lansbury PT, Sulzer D. Impaired degradation of mutant
alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Science. 2004;305:1292-5.
[40] Vogiatzi T, Xilouri M, Vekrellis K, Stefanis L. Wild type alpha-synuclein is degraded by chaperone-
mediated autophagy and macroautophagy in neuronal cells. J Biol Chem. 2008;283:23542-56.
[41] Steinfeld R, Reinhardt K, Schreiber K, Hillebrand M, Kraetzner R, Brück W, et al. Cathepsin D
deficiency is associated with a human neurodegenerative disorder. The American Journal of Human
Genetics. 2006;78:988-98.
[42] Smith KR, Dahl H-HM, Canafoglia L, Andermann E, Damiano J, Morbin M, et al. Cathepsin F
mutations cause Type B Kufs disease, an adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Human molecular
genetics. 2013;22:1417-23.
[43] Bunk J, Prieto Huarcaya S, Drobny A, Dobert JP, Walther L, Rose-John S, et al. Cathepsin D variants
associated with neurodegenerative diseases show dysregulated functionality and modified α-synuclein
degradation properties. Frontiers in cell and developmental biology. 2021;9:581805.
[44] Galjart NJ, Morreau H, Willemsen R, Gillemans N, Bonten EJ, d'Azzo A. Human lysosomal protective
protein has cathepsin A-like activity distinct from its protective function. Journal of Biological
Chemistry. 1991;266:14754-62.
[45] Koike M, Nakanishi H, Saftig P, Ezaki J, Isahara K, Ohsawa Y, et al. Cathepsin D deficiency induces
lysosomal storage with ceroid lipofuscin in mouse CNS neurons. Journal of Neuroscience.
2000;20:6898-906.
[46] Papassotiropoulos A, Bagli M, Kurz A, Kornhuber J, Förstl H, Maier W, et al. A genetic variation of
cathepsin D is a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Ann Neurol. 2000;47:399-403.
[47] Sayad A, Noruzinia M, Zamani M, Harirchian MH, Kazemnejad A. Association Study of Cathepsin D
Gene Polymorphism in Iranian Patients with Sporadic Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease. Dementia and
Geriatric Cognitive Disorders. 2014;37:257-64.
43

---PAGE BREAK---

[48] Schuur M, Ikram MA, Van Swieten JC, Isaacs A, Vergeer-Drop JM, Hofman A, et al. Cathepsin D
gene and the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a population-based study and meta-analysis. Neurobiology
of aging. 2011;32:1607-14.
[49] Cermak S, Kosicek M, Mladenovic-Djordjevic A, Smiljanic K, Kanazir S, Hecimovic S. Loss of
cathepsin B and L leads to lysosomal dysfunction, NPC-like cholesterol sequestration and accumulation
of the key Alzheimer's proteins. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0167428.
[50] McGlinchey RP, Lee JC. Cysteine cathepsins are essential in lysosomal degradation of α-synuclein.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2015;112:9322-7.
[51] Robak LA, Jansen IE, van Rooij J, Uitterlinden AG, Kraaij R, Jankovic J, et al. Excessive burden of
lysosomal storage disorder gene variants in Parkinson’s disease. Brain. 2017;140:3191-203.
[52] Chang D, Nalls MA, Hallgrímsdóttir IB, Hunkapiller J, van der Brug M, Cai F, et al. A meta-analysis
of genome-wide association studies identifies 17 new Parkinson's disease risk loci. Nature Genetics.
2017;49:1511-6.
[53] McGlinchey RP, Lacy SM, Huffer KE, Tayebi N, Sidransky E, Lee JC. C-terminal α-synuclein
truncations are linked to cysteine cathepsin activity in Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Biological
Chemistry. 2019;294:9973-84.
[54] Cullen V, Lindfors M, Ng J, Paetau A, Swinton E, Kolodziej P, et al. Cathepsin D expression level
affects alpha-synuclein processing, aggregation, and toxicity in vivo. Mol Brain. 2009;2:5.
[55] McGlinchey RP, Lacy SM, Walker Iii RL, Lee JC. Cathepsin K is a potent disaggregase of α-synuclein
fibrils. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2020;529:1106-11.
[56] Eymsh B, Drobny A, Heyn TR, Xiang W, Lucius R, Schwarz K, et al. Toxic Metamorphosis—How
Changes from Lysosomal to Cytosolic pH Modify the Alpha-Synuclein Aggregation Pattern.
Biomacromolecules. 2020;21:4673-84.
[57] Kang J, Kim JW, Heo H, Lee J, Park KY, Yoon JH, et al. Identification of BAG2 and cathepsin D as
plasma biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease. Clinical and translational science. 2021;14:606-16.
[58] Wu HC, Chang KH, Chiang MC, Chen CM. Alterations of Plasma Galectin-3 and C3 Levels in Patients
with Parkinson's Disease. Brain Sci. 2021;11.
[59] van Dijk KD, Persichetti E, Chiasserini D, Eusebi P, Beccari T, Calabresi P, et al. Changes in
endolysosomal enzyme activities in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson's disease. Movement
Disorders. 2013;28:747-54.
[60] Sjödin S, Brinkmalm G, Öhrfelt A, Parnetti L, Paciotti S, Hansson O, et al. Endo-lysosomal proteins
and ubiquitin CSF concentrations in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Alzheimer's Research &
Therapy. 2019;11:82.
[61] Mantle D, Falkous G, Ishiura S, Perry RH, Perry EK. Comparison of cathepsin protease activities in
brain tissue from normal cases and cases with Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body dementia, Parkinson's
disease and Huntington's disease. Journal of the Neurological Sciences. 1995;131:65-70.
[62] McNeill A, Magalhaes J, Shen C, Chau K-Y, Hughes D, Mehta A, et al. Ambroxol improves lysosomal
biochemistry in glucocerebrosidase mutation-linked Parkinson disease cells. Brain. 2014;137:1481-95.
[63] Fernandes Hugo JR, Hartfield Elizabeth M, Christian Helen C, Emmanoulidou E, Zheng Y, Booth H,
et al. ER Stress and Autophagic Perturbations Lead to Elevated Extracellular α-Synuclein in GBA-N370S
Parkinson's iPSC-Derived Dopamine Neurons. Stem Cell Reports. 2016;6:342-56.
[64] Prieto Huarcaya S, Drobny A, Marques ARA, Di Spiezio A, Dobert JP, Balta D, et al. Recombinant
pro-CTSD (cathepsin D) enhances SNCA/α-Synuclein degradation in α-Synucleinopathy models.
Autophagy. 2022;18:1127-51.
[65] Marques ARA, Di Spiezio A, Thießen N, Schmidt L, Grötzinger J, Lüllmann-Rauch R, et al. Enzyme
replacement therapy with recombinant pro-CTSD (cathepsin D) corrects defective proteolysis and
autophagy in neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Autophagy. 2020;16:811-25.
[66] Plotegher N, Bubacco L, Greggio E, Civiero L. Ceramides in Parkinson’s disease: from recent
evidence to new hypotheses. Front Neurosci 13: 330. 2019.
[67] Abbott SK, Li H, Munoz SS, Knoch B, Batterham M, Murphy KE, et al. Altered ceramide acyl chain
length and ceramide synthase gene expression in Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders.
2014;29:518-26.
44

---PAGE BREAK---

[68] Theophilus B, Latham T, Grabowski GA, Smith FI. Gaucher disease: molecular heterogeneity and
phenotype-genotype correlations. American journal of human genetics. 1989;45:212.
[69] Neudorfer O, Giladi N, Elstein D, Abrahamov A, Turezkite T, Aghai E, et al. Occurrence of
Parkinson's syndrome in type 1 Gaucher disease. QJM: An International Journal of Medicine.
1996;89:691-4.
[70] Goker-Alpan O, Schiffmann R, LaMarca ME, Nussbaum RL, McInerney-Leo A, Sidransky E.
Parkinsonism among Gaucher disease carriers. Journal of medical genetics. 2004;41:937-40.
[71] Eto Y, Suzuki K. Brain Sphingoglycolipids in Krabbe's Globoid Cell Leucodystrophy 1 Journal of
Neurochemistry. 1971;18:503-11.
[72] Graziano ACE, Cardile V. History, genetic, and recent advances on Krabbe disease. Gene.
2015;555:2-13.
[73] Stirnemann J, Belmatoug N, Camou F, Serratrice C, Froissart R, Caillaud C, et al. A Review of
Gaucher Disease Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation and Treatments. International Journal of
Molecular Sciences. 2017;18:441.
[74] Nagral A. Gaucher disease. Journal of clinical and experimental hepatology. 2014;4:37-50.
[75] Sidransky E, Nalls MA, Aasly JO, Aharon-Peretz J, Annesi G, Barbosa ER, et al. Multicenter analysis
of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1651-61.
[76] Mazzulli JR, Xu Y-H, Sun Y, Knight AL, McLean PJ, Caldwell GA, et al. Gaucher disease
glucocerebrosidase and α-synuclein form a bidirectional pathogenic loop in synucleinopathies. Cell.
2011;146:37-52.
[77] Wu J, Lou H, Alerte TNM, Stachowski EK, Chen J, Singleton AB, et al. Lewy-like aggregation of α-
synuclein reduces protein phosphatase 2A activity in vitro and in vivo. Neuroscience. 2012;207:288-
97.
[78] Liu G, Chen M, Mi N, Yang W, Li X, Wang P, et al. Increased oligomerization and phosphorylation
of α-synuclein are associated with decreased activity of glucocerebrosidase and protein phosphatase
2A in aging monkey brains. Neurobiology of Aging. 2015;36:2649-59.
[79] Hou Y, Dan X, Babbar M, Wei Y, Hasselbalch SG, Croteau DL, et al. Ageing as a risk factor for
neurodegenerative disease. Nature Reviews Neurology. 2019;15:565-81.
[80] Cutler RG, Kelly J, Storie K, Pedersen WA, Tammara A, Hatanpaa K, et al. Involvement of oxidative
stress-induced abnormalities in ceramide and cholesterol metabolism in brain aging and Alzheimer's
disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2004;101:2070-5.
[81] Kolesnick RN, Krönke M. Regulation of Ceramide Production and Apoptosis. Annual Review of
Physiology. 1998;60:643-65.
[82] Gangoiti P, Granado MH, Arana L, Ouro A, Gomez-Muñoz A. Activation of protein kinase C-α is
essential for stimulation of cell proliferation by ceramide 1-phosphate. FEBS Letters. 2010;584:517-24.
[83] Venable ME, Lee JY, Smyth MJ, Bielawska A, Obeid LM. Role of Ceramide in Cellular Senescence.
Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1995;270:30701-8.
[84] Custodia A, Aramburu-Núñez M, Correa-Paz C, Posado-Fernández A, Gómez-Larrauri A, Castillo J,
et al. Ceramide Metabolism and Parkinson’s Disease—Therapeutic Targets. Biomolecules2021.
[85] Hagberg B, Kollberg H, Sourander P, Åkesson HO. Infantile Globoid Cell Leucodystrophy–(Krabbe's
Disease) A clinical and genetic study of 32 Swedish cases 1953–1967. Neuropaediatrie. 1969;1:74-88.
[86] Lyon G, Hagberg B, Evrard PH, Allaire C, Pavone L, Vanier M. Symptomatology of late onset
Krabbe's leukodystrophy: the European experience. Developmental neuroscience. 1991;13:240-4.
[87] Wenger DA, Rafi MA, Luzi P. Molecular genetics of Krabbe disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy):
Diagnostic and clinical implications. Human Mutation. 1997;10:268-79.
[88] Xu C, Sakai N, Taniike M, Inui K, Ozono K. Six novel mutations detected in the GALC gene in 17
Japanese patients with Krabbe disease, and new genotype–phenotype correlation. Journal of Human
Genetics. 2006;51:548-54.
[89] Senkevich K, Zorca CE, Dworkind A, Rudakou U, Somerville E, Yu E, et al. GALC variants affect
galactosylceramidase enzymatic activity and risk of Parkinson's disease. medRxiv. 2022.
[90] Marshall MS, Jakubauskas B, Bogue W, Stoskute M, Hauck Z, Rue E, et al. Analysis of age-related
changes in psychosine metabolism in the human brain. PLOS ONE. 2018;13:e0193438.
45

---PAGE BREAK---

[91] Smith BR, Santos MB, Marshall MS, Cantuti-Castelvetri L, Lopez-Rosas A, Li G, et al. Neuronal
inclusions of α-synuclein contribute to the pathogenesis of Krabbe disease. The Journal of pathology.
2014;232:509-21.
[92] Do CB, Tung JY, Dorfman E, Kiefer AK, Drabant EM, Francke U, et al. Web-based genome-wide
association study identifies two novel loci and a substantial genetic component for Parkinson's disease.
PLoS genetics. 2011;7:e1002141.
[93] Nalls MA, Blauwendraat C, Vallerga CL, Heilbron K, Bandres-Ciga S, Chang D, et al. Identification
of novel risk loci, causal insights, and heritable risk for Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis of genome-
wide association studies. The Lancet Neurology. 2019;18:1091-102.
[94] Li G, Cui S, Du J, Liu J, Zhang P, Fu Y, et al. Association of GALC, ZNF184, IL1R2 and ELOVL7 With
Parkinson’s Disease in Southern Chinese. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience. 2018;10.
[95] Gustavson KH, Hagberg B. The incidence and genetics of metachromatic leucodystrophy in
northern Sweden. Acta Paediatr Scand. 1971;60:585-90.
[96] Doherty K, Frazier SB, Clark M, Childers A, Pruthi S, Wenger DA, et al. A closer look at ARSA activity
in a patient with metachromatic leukodystrophy. Molecular genetics and metabolism reports.
2019;19:100460.
[97] Paciotti S, Albi E, Parnetti L, Beccari T. Lysosomal ceramide metabolism disorders: implications in
Parkinson’s disease. Journal of clinical medicine. 2020;9:594.
[98] Suzuki K, Iseki E, Togo T, Yamaguchi A, Katsuse O, Katsuyama K, et al. Neuronal and glial
accumulation of α-and β-synucleins in human lipidoses. Acta neuropathologica. 2007;114:481-9.
[99] Martinelli P, Ippoliti M, Montanari M, Martinelli A, Mochi M, Giuliani S, et al. Arylsulphatase A
(ASA) activity in parkinsonism and symptomatic essential tremor. Acta neurologica scandinavica.
1994;89:171-4.
[100] Antelmi E, Rizzo G, Fabbri M, Capellari S, Scaglione C, Martinelli P. Arylsulphatase A activity in
familial parkinsonism: a pathogenetic role? Journal of neurology. 2014;261:1803-9.
[101] Lee JS, Kanai K, Suzuki M, Kim WS, Yoo HS, Fu Y, et al. Arylsulfatase A, a genetic modifier of
Parkinson’s disease, is an α-synuclein chaperone. Brain. 2019;142:2845-59.
[102] Fan Y, Mao C-y, Dong Y-l, Shen S, Zhang Q-m, Yao D-b, et al. ARSA gene variants and Parkinson’s
disease. Brain. 2020;143:e47-e.
[103] Makarious MB, Diez-Fairen M, Krohn L, Blauwendraat C, Bandres-Ciga S, Ding J, et al. ARSA
variants in α-synucleinopathies. Brain. 2019;142:e70-e.
[104] Jenkins RW, Idkowiak-Baldys J, Simbari F, Canals D, Roddy P, Riner CD, et al. A novel mechanism
of lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase maturation: requirement for carboxyl-terminal proteolytic
processing. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2011;286:3777-88.
[105] Dagan E, Schlesinger I, Ayoub M, Mory A, Nassar M, Kurolap A, et al. The contribution of
Niemann-Pick SMPD1 mutations to Parkinson disease in Ashkenazi Jews. Parkinsonism & Related
Disorders. 2015;21:1067-71.
[106] Foo J-N, Liany H, Bei J-X, Yu X-Q, Liu J, Au W-L, et al. A rare lysosomal enzyme gene SMPD1 variant
(p. R591C) associates with Parkinson's disease. Neurobiology of aging. 2013;34:2890-e13.
[107] Gan-Or Z, Ozelius LJ, Bar-Shira A, Saunders-Pullman R, Mirelman A, Kornreich R, et al. The p.L302P
mutation in the lysosomal enzyme gene SMPD1 is a risk factor for Parkinson disease. Neurology.
2013;80:1606-10.
[108] Ylönen S, Siitonen A, Nalls MA, Ylikotila P, Autere J, Eerola-Rautio J, et al. Genetic risk factors in
Finnish patients with Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism & related disorders. 2017;45:39-43.
[109] Alcalay RN, Mallett V, Vanderperre B, Tavassoly O, Dauvilliers Y, Wu RYJ, et al. SMPD1 mutations,
activity, and α-synuclein accumulation in Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders. 2019;34:526-35.
[110] Inzelberg R, Korczyn AD. Parkinsonism in adult-onset GM2 gangliosidosis. Movement disorders:
official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 1994;9:375-7.
[111] Roze E, Ewenczyk C, Sedel F. GM2 Gangliosidosis. 2010.
[112] Regier DS, Proia RL, D’Azzo A, Tifft CJ. The GM1 and GM2 gangliosidoses: natural history and
progress toward therapy. Pediatric endocrinology reviews: PER. 2016;13:663.
46

---PAGE BREAK---

[113] Cachon-Gonzalez MB, Zaccariotto E, Cox TM. Genetics and Therapies for GM2 Gangliosidosis.
Curr Gene Ther. 2018;18:68-89.
[114] Brekk OR, Korecka JA, Crapart CC, Huebecker M, MacBain ZK, Rosenthal SA, et al. Upregulating
β-hexosaminidase activity in rodents prevents α-synuclein lipid associations and protects
dopaminergic neurons from α-synuclein-mediated neurotoxicity. Acta neuropathologica
communications. 2020;8:1-14.
[115] Keilani S, Lun Y, Stevens AC, Williams HN, Sjoberg ER, Khanna R, et al. Lysosomal dysfunction in
a mouse model of Sandhoff disease leads to accumulation of ganglioside-bound amyloid-β peptide.
Journal of Neuroscience. 2012;32:5223-36.
[116] Parnetti L, Chiasserini D, Persichetti E, Eusebi P, Varghese S, Qureshi MM, et al. Cerebrospinal
fluid lysosomal enzymes and alpha-synuclein in Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders.
2014;29:1019-27.
[117] McNeill A. Is elevated beta-hexosaminidase activity a potential biomarker for Parkinson's
disease? Movement Disorders. 2014;29:1328-9.
[118] Kim H-J, Jeon B, Song J, Lee W-W, Park H, Shin C-W. Leukocyte glucocerebrosidase and β-
hexosaminidase activity in sporadic and genetic Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders.
2016;23:99-101.
[119] Huebecker M, Moloney EB, van der Spoel AC, Priestman DA, Isacson O, Hallett PJ, et al. Reduced
sphingolipid hydrolase activities, substrate accumulation and ganglioside decline in Parkinson’s
disease. Molecular neurodegeneration. 2019;14:1-21.
[120] Eskelinen E-L, Tanaka Y, Saftig P. At the acidic edge: emerging functions for lysosomal membrane
proteins. Trends in Cell Biology. 2003;13:137-45.
[121] Dehay B, Martinez-Vicente M, Caldwell GA, Caldwell KA, Yue Z, Cookson MR, et al. Lysosomal
impairment in Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders. 2013;28:725-32.
[122] Hunziker W, Geuze HJ. Intracellular trafficking of lysosomal membrane proteins. BioEssays.
1996;18:379-89.
[123] Alvarez-Erviti L, Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Cooper JM, Caballero C, Ferrer I, Obeso JA, et al. Chaperone-
Mediated Autophagy Markers in Parkinson Disease Brains. Archives of Neurology. 2010;67:1464-72.
[124] Alessandrini F, Pezzè L, Ciribilli Y. LAMPs: Shedding light on cancer biology. Seminars in Oncology.
2017;44:239-53.
[125] Dominguez-Bautista JA, Klinkenberg M, Brehm N, Subramaniam M, Kern B, Roeper J, et al. Loss
of lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3) enhances cellular vulnerability against
proteasomal inhibition. European Journal of Cell Biology. 2015;94:148-61.
[126] Nishino I, Fu J, Tanji K, Yamada T, Shimojo S, Koori T, et al. Primary LAMP-2 deficiency causes X-
linked vacuolar cardiomyopathy and myopathy (Danon disease). Nature. 2000;406:906-10.
[127] Wu G, Wang X, Feng X, Zhang A, Li J, Gu K, et al. Altered expression of autophagic genes in the
peripheral leukocytes of patients with sporadic Parkinson's disease. Brain Research. 2011;1394:105-
11.
[128] Klaver AC, Coffey MP, Aasly JO, Loeffler DA. CSF lamp2 concentrations are decreased in female
Parkinson’s disease patients with LRRK2 mutations. Brain Research. 2018;1683:12-6.
[129] Pang S, Chen D, Zhang A, Qin X, Yan B. Genetic analysis of the LAMP-2 gene promoter in patients
with sporadic Parkinson's disease. Neuroscience Letters. 2012;526:63-7.
[130] Banerjee R, Beal MF, Thomas B. Autophagy in neurodegenerative disorders: pathogenic roles
and therapeutic implications. Trends in Neurosciences. 2010;33:541-9.
[131] Mak SK, McCormack AL, Manning-Boğ AB, Cuervo AM, Di Monte DA. Lysosomal Degradation of
alpha-Synuclein in Vivo. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2010;285:13621-9.
[132] Gitler AD, Chesi A, Geddie ML, Strathearn KE, Hamamichi S, Hill KJ, et al. α-Synuclein is part of a
diverse and highly conserved interaction network that includes PARK9 and manganese toxicity. Nature
Genetics. 2009;41:308-15.
[133] Schultheis PJ, Hagen TT, O’Toole KK, Tachibana A, Burke CR, McGill DL, et al. Characterization of
the P5 subfamily of P-type transport ATPases in mice. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications. 2004;323:731-8.
47

---PAGE BREAK---

[134] van Veen S, Martin S, Van den Haute C, Benoy V, Lyons J, Vanhoutte R, et al. ATP13A2 deficiency
disrupts lysosomal polyamine export. Nature. 2020;578:419-24.
[135] Vrijsen S, Besora-Casals L, van Veen S, Zielich J, Van den Haute C, Hamouda NN, et al. ATP13A2-
mediated endo-lysosomal polyamine export counters mitochondrial oxidative stress. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences. 2020;117:31198-207.
[136] Rinaldi DE, Corradi GR, Cuesta LM, Adamo HP, de Tezanos Pinto F. The Parkinson-associated
human P5B-ATPase ATP13A2 protects against the iron-induced cytotoxicity. Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA) - Biomembranes. 2015;1848:1646-55.
[137] Dehay B, Ramirez A, Martinez-Vicente M, Perier C, Canron MH, Doudnikoff E, et al. Loss of P-type
ATPase ATP13A2/PARK9 function induces general lysosomal deficiency and leads to Parkinson disease
neurodegeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:9611-6.
[138] Di Fonzo A, Chien HF, Socal M, Giraudo S, Tassorelli C, Iliceto G, et al. ATP13A2 missense
mutations in juvenile parkinsonism and young onset Parkinson disease. Neurology. 2007;68:1557-62.
[139] Lees AJ, Singleton AB. Clinical heterogeneity of ATP13A2 linked disease (Kufor-Rakeb) justifies a
PARK designation. Neurology. 2007;68:1553.
[140] Najim Al-Din AS, Wriekat A, Mubaidin A, Dasouki M, Hiari M. Pallido-pyramidal degeneration,
supranuclear upgaze paresis and dementia: Kufor-Rakeb syndrome. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica.
1994;89:347-52.
[141] Williams DR, Hadeed A, al-Din ASN, Wreikat A-L, Lees AJ. Kufor Rakeb Disease: Autosomal
recessive, levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with pyramidal degeneration, supranuclear gaze palsy,
and dementia. Movement Disorders. 2005;20:1264-71.
[142] Podhajska A, Musso A, Trancikova A, Stafa K, Moser R, Sonnay S, et al. Common Pathogenic
Effects of Missense Mutations in the P-Type ATPase ATP13A2 (PARK9) Associated with Early-Onset
Parkinsonism. PLOS ONE. 2012;7:e39942.
[143] Usenovic M, Tresse E, Mazzulli JR, Taylor JP, Krainc D. Deficiency of ATP13A2 leads to lysosomal
dysfunction, α-synuclein accumulation, and neurotoxicity. J Neurosci. 2012;32:4240-6.
[144] Park J-S, Koentjoro B, Davis RL, Sue CM. Loss of ATP13A2 impairs glycolytic function in Kufor-
Rakeb syndrome patient-derived cell models. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders. 2016;27:67-73.
[145] Cang C, Aranda K, Seo Y-j, Gasnier B, Ren D. TMEM175 Is an Organelle K+ Channel Regulating
Lysosomal Function. Cell. 2015;162:1101-12.
[146] Hu M, Li P, Wang C, Feng X, Geng Q, Chen W, et al. Parkinson’s disease-risk protein TMEM175 is
a proton-activated proton channel in lysosomes. Cell. 2022;185:2292-308.e20.
[147] Jinn S, Drolet RE, Cramer PE, Wong AH-K, Toolan DM, Gretzula CA, et al. TMEM175 deficiency
impairs lysosomal and mitochondrial function and increases α-synuclein aggregation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences. 2017;114:2389-94.
[148] Jinn S, Blauwendraat C, Toolan D, Gretzula CA, Drolet RE, Smith S, et al. Functionalization of the
TMEM175 p.M393T variant as a risk factor for Parkinson disease. Human Molecular Genetics.
2019;28:3244-54.
[149] Qu L, Lin B, Zeng W, Fan C, Wu H, Ge Y, et al. Lysosomal K+ channel TMEM175 promotes apoptosis
and aggravates symptoms of Parkinson's disease. EMBO reports. 2022;23:e53234.
[150] Heybrock S, Kanerva K, Meng Y, Ing C, Liang A, Xiong ZJ, et al. Lysosomal integral membrane
protein-2 (LIMP-2/SCARB2) is involved in lysosomal cholesterol export. Nat Commun. 2019;10:3521.
[151] Leanne D, Michael S, Paul S, Guido R. SCARB2/LIMP2 deficiency in action myoclonus-renal failure
syndrome. Epileptic Disorders. 2016;18:63-72.
[152] Hopfner F, Schulte EC, Mollenhauer B, Bereznai B, Knauf F, Lichtner P, et al. The role of SCARB2
as susceptibility factor in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2013;28:538-40.
[153] Rothaug M, Zunke F, Mazzulli JR, Schweizer M, Altmeppen H, Lüllmann-Rauch R, et al. LIMP-2
expression is critical for β-glucocerebrosidase activity and α-synuclein clearance. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2014;111:15573-8.
[154] Zunke F, Andresen L, Wesseler S, Groth J, Arnold P, Rothaug M, et al. Characterization of the
complex formed by β-glucocerebrosidase and the lysosomal integral membrane protein type-2.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2016;113:3791-6.
48

---PAGE BREAK---

[155] Yamayoshi S, Iizuka S, Yamashita T, Minagawa H, Mizuta K, Okamoto M, et al. Human SCARB2-
Dependent Infection by Coxsackievirus A7, A14, and A16 and Enterovirus 71. Journal of Virology.
2012;86:5686-96.
[156] Rutsch F, Gailus S, Miousse IR, Suormala T, Sagné C, Toliat MR, et al. Identification of a putative
lysosomal cobalamin exporter altered in the cblF defect of vitamin B12 metabolism. Nature Genetics.
2009;41:234-9.
[157] Kawaguchi K, Okamoto T, Morita M, Imanaka T. Translocation of the ABC transporter ABCD4
from the endoplasmic reticulum to lysosomes requires the escort protein LMBD1. Scientific Reports.
2016;6:30183.
[158] Chanarin I, Deacon R, Lumb M, Muir M, Perry J. Cobalamin-Folate Interrelations: A Critical
Review. Blood. 1985;66:479-89.
[159] Tseng LT-L, Lin C-L, Tzen K-Y, Chang SC, Chang M-F. LMBD1 Protein Serves as a Specific Adaptor
for Insulin Receptor Internalization. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2013;288:32424-32.
[160] Greener T, Zhao X, Nojima H, Eisenberg E, Greene LE. Role of Cyclin G-associated Kinase in
Uncoating Clathrin-coated Vesicles from Non-neuronal Cells *. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2000;275:1365-70.
[161] Umeda A, Meyerholz A, Ungewickell E. Identification of the universal cofactor (auxilin 2) in
clathrin coat dissociation. European Journal of Cell Biology. 2000;79:336-42.
[162] Kametaka S, Moriyama K, Burgos PV, Eisenberg E, Greene LE, Mattera R, et al. Canonical
Interaction of Cyclin G–associated Kinase with Adaptor Protein 1 Regulates Lysosomal Enzyme Sorting.
Molecular Biology of the Cell. 2007;18:2991-3001.
[163] Zhang S, Wang L, Yi S, Li S, Wang H, Song L, et al. Cyclin-G-associated kinase GAK/Aux orchestrates
glial autophagy via Atg9 phosphorylation in Parkinson’s disease. bioRxiv. 2021:2021.08.16.456579.
[164] Koss DJ, Campesan S, Giorgini F, Outeiro TF. Dysfunction of RAB39B-Mediated Vesicular
Trafficking in Lewy Body Diseases. Movement Disorders. 2021;36:1744-58.
[165] Wilson Gabrielle R, Sim Joe CH, McLean C, Giannandrea M, Galea Charles A, Riseley Jessica R, et
al. Mutations in RAB39B Cause X-Linked Intellectual Disability and Early-Onset Parkinson Disease with
α-Synuclein Pathology. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2014;95:729-35.
[166] Lesage S, Bras J, Cormier-Dequaire F, Condroyer C, Nicolas A, Darwent L, et al. Loss-of-function
mutations in RAB39B are associated with typical early-onset Parkinson disease. Neurology Genetics.
2015;1:e9.
[167] Strovel ET, Cusmano-Ozog K, Wood T, Yu C, Committee ALQA. Measurement of lysosomal
enzyme activities: A technical standard of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
(ACMG). Genetics in Medicine. 2022;24:769-83.
[168] Beratis NG, Turner BM, Labadie G, Hirschhorn K. α-L-fucosidase in cultured skin fibroblasts from
normal subjects and fucosidosis patients. Pediatric Research. 1977;11:862-6.
[169] Barrett AJ, Heath MF. Lysosomes: a laboratory handbook. Dingle, JT Amsterdam: North-Holland.
1977:19-145.
[170] Christomanou H, Sandhoff K. A sensitive fluorescence assay for the simultaneous and separate
determination of arylsulphatases A and B. Clinica Chimica Acta. 1977;79:527-31.
[171] Potier M, Mameli L, Bélisle M, Dallaire L, Melançon SB. Fluorometric assay of neuraminidase with
a sodium (4-methylumbelliferyl-α-d-N-acetylneuraminate) substrate. Analytical Biochemistry.
1979;94:287-96.
[172] Besley GTN, Moss SE. Studies on pyrophosphate diesterase activity in cultured human fibroblasts:
a deficiency in Niemann-Pick disease. Clinica Chimica Acta. 1981;117:75-84.
[173] Wiederschain G, Srinivasa R, Kolodny E. Characterization of 6-hexadecanoylamino-4-
methylumbelliferyl-β-D-galactopyranoside as fluorogenic substrate of galactocerebrosidase for the
diagnosis of Krabbe disease. Clinica chimica acta. 1992;205:87-96.
[174] Voznyi YV, Keulemans JLM, van Diggelen OP. A fluorimetric enzyme assay for the diagnosis of
MPS II (Hunter disease). Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease. 2001;24:675-80.
49

---PAGE BREAK---

[175] Andersson SV, Sjögren EC, Magnusson C, Gierow JP. Sequencing, expression, and enzymatic
characterization of β-hexosaminidase in rabbit lacrimal gland and primary cultured acinar cells.
Glycobiology. 2005;15:211-20.
[176] Downing WL, Galpin JD, Clemens S, Lauzon SM, Samuels AL, Pidkowich MS, et al. Synthesis of
enzymatically active human α-l-iduronidase in Arabidopsis cgl (complex glycan-deficient) seeds. Plant
Biotechnology Journal. 2006;4:169-81.
[177] Motabar O, Liu K, Southall N, Marugan JJ, Goldin E, Sidransky E, et al. High throughput screening
for inhibitors of alpha-galactosidase. Current chemical genomics. 2010;4.
[178] Herrera Moro Chao D, Kallemeijn WW, Marques ARA, Orre M, Ottenhoff R, van Roomen C, et al.
Visualization of Active Glucocerebrosidase in Rodent Brain with High Spatial Resolution following In
Situ Labeling with Fluorescent Activity Based Probes. PLOS ONE. 2015;10:e0138107.
[179] Annunziata I, Patterson A, Helton D, Hu H, Moshiach S, Gomero E, et al. Lysosomal NEU1
deficiency affects amyloid precursor protein levels and amyloid-β secretion via deregulated lysosomal
exocytosis. Nature communications. 2013;4:1-12.
[180] Kumar AB, Spacil Z, Ghomashchi F, Masi S, Sumida T, Ito M, et al. Fluorimetric assays for N-
acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase and arylsulfatase B based on the natural substrates for confirmation
of mucopolysaccharidoses types IVA and VI. Clinica Chimica Acta. 2015;451:125-8.
[181] He X, Schuchman EH, Simonaro CM. A New Fluorescent Method to Detect Sulfamidase Activity
in Blood, Tissue Extracts and Dried Blood Spots. Journal of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Screening.
2021;9.
[182] Kumar AB, Masi S, Ghomashchi F, Chennamaneni NK, Ito M, Scott CR, et al. Tandem mass
spectrometry has a larger analytical range than fluorescence assays of lysosomal enzymes: application
to newborn screening and diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidoses types II, IVA, and VI. Clinical chemistry.
2015;61:1363-71.
[183] Ribas GS, De Mari JF, Civallero G, de Souza HM, Burin MG, Vargas CR, et al. Validation of a
multiplex tandem mass spectrometry method for the detection of selected lysosomal storage diseases
in dried blood spots. Journal of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Screening.
2017;5:2326409817692360.
[184] Yu C, Sun Q, Zhou H. Enzymatic Screening and Diagnosis of Lysosomal Storage Diseases. N Am J
Med Sci (Boston). 2013;6:186-93.
[185] Drobny A, Prieto Huarcaya S, Dobert J, Kluge A, Bunk J, Schlothauer T, et al. The role of lysosomal
cathepsins in neurodegeneration: Mechanistic insights, diagnostic potential and therapeutic
approaches. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research. 2022;1869:119243.
[186] Mazzulli JR, Zunke F, Isacson O, Studer L, Krainc D. α-Synuclein-induced lysosomal dysfunction
occurs through disruptions in protein trafficking in human midbrain synucleinopathy models. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113:1931-6.
[187] Cuddy LK, Mazzulli JR. Analysis of lysosomal hydrolase trafficking and activity in human iPSC-
derived neuronal models. STAR Protocols. 2021;2:100340.
[188] Kulenkampff K, Wolf Perez A-M, Sormanni P, Habchi J, Vendruscolo M. Quantifying misfolded
protein oligomers as drug targets and biomarkers in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. Nature Reviews
Chemistry. 2021;5:277-94.
[189] Bunk J, Prieto Huarcaya S, Drobny A, Dobert JP, Walther L, Rose-John S, et al. Cathepsin D Variants
Associated With Neurodegenerative Diseases Show Dysregulated Functionality and Modified α-
Synuclein Degradation Properties. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology. 2021;9.
[190] Abu-Remaileh M, Wyant GA, Kim C, Laqtom NN, Abbasi M, Chan SH, et al. Lysosomal
metabolomics reveals V-ATPase- and mTOR-dependent regulation of amino acid efflux from
lysosomes. Science. 2017;358:807-13.
[191] Kalia LV, Lang AE. Parkinson's disease. The Lancet. 2015;386:896-912.
[192] Balducci C, Pierguidi L, Persichetti E, Parnetti L, Sbaragli M, Tassi C, et al. Lysosomal hydrolases
in cerebrospinal fluid from subjects with Parkinson's disease. Movement Disorders. 2007;22:1481-4.
50

---PAGE BREAK---

[193] Lerche S, Schulte C, Wurster I, Machetanz G, Roeben B, Zimmermann M, et al. The Mutation
Matters: CSF Profiles of GCase, Sphingolipids, α-Synuclein in PDGBA. Movement Disorders.
2021;36:1216-28.
[194] Parnetti L, Paciotti S, Eusebi P, Dardis A, Zampieri S, Chiasserini D, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid β-
glucocerebrosidase activity is reduced in parkinson's disease patients. Movement Disorders.
2017;32:1423-31.
[195] Virreira Winter S, Karayel O, Strauss MT, Padmanabhan S, Surface M, Merchant K, et al. Urinary
proteome profiling for stratifying patients with familial Parkinson's disease. EMBO Mol Med.
2021;13:e13257.
[196] Alcalay RN, Levy OA, Waters CH, Fahn S, Ford B, Kuo S-H, et al. Glucocerebrosidase activity in
Parkinson’s disease with and without GBA mutations. Brain. 2015;138:2648-58.
[197] van Niel G, D'Angelo G, Raposo G. Shedding light on the cell biology of extracellular vesicles.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2018;19:213-28.
[198] Fiandaca MS, Kapogiannis D, Mapstone M, Boxer A, Eitan E, Schwartz JB, et al. Identification of
preclinical Alzheimer's disease by a profile of pathogenic proteins in neurally derived blood exosomes:
A case-control study. Alzheimer's & Dementia. 2015;11:600-7.e1.
[199] Kluge A, Bunk J, Schaeffer E, Drobny A, Xiang W, Knacke H, et al. Detection of neuron-derived
pathological α-synuclein in blood. Brain. 2022.
[200] Ungerstedt U, Ljungberg T, Steg G. Behavioral, physiological, and neurochemical changes after
6-hydroxydopamine-induced degeneration of the nigro-striatal dopamine neurons. Adv Neurol.
1974;5:421-6.
[201] Thiruchelvam MJ, Powers JM, Cory-Slechta DA, Richfield EK. Risk factors for dopaminergic neuron
loss in human α-synuclein transgenic mice. European Journal of Neuroscience. 2004;19:845-54.
[202] Langston JW, Ballard P, Tetrud JW, Irwin I. Chronic Parkinsonism in Humans Due to a Product of
Meperidine-Analog Synthesis. Science. 1983;219:979-80.
[203] Klein RL, King MA, Hamby ME, Meyer EM. Dopaminergic Cell Loss Induced by Human A30P α-
Synuclein Gene Transfer to the Rat Substantia Nigra. Human Gene Therapy. 2002;13:605-12.
[204] Kirik D, Rosenblad C, Burger C, Lundberg C, Johansen TE, Muzyczka N, et al. Parkinson-Like
Neurodegeneration Induced by Targeted Overexpression of α-Synuclein in the Nigrostriatal System.
The Journal of Neuroscience. 2002;22:2780.
[205] Lo Bianco C, Ridet JL, Schneider BL, Déglon N, Aebischer P. α-Synucleinopathy and selective
dopaminergic neuron loss in a rat lentiviral-based model of Parkinson's disease. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2002;99:10813-8.
[206] Antony PMA, Diederich NJ, Balling R. Parkinson’s disease mouse models in translational research.
Mammalian Genome. 2011;22:401-19.
[207] Li Y, Liu W, Oo TF, Wang L, Tang Y, Jackson-Lewis V, et al. Mutant LRRK2R1441G BAC transgenic
mice recapitulate cardinal features of Parkinson's disease. Nature Neuroscience. 2009;12:826-8.
[208] Li X, Patel JC, Wang J, Avshalumov MV, Nicholson C, Buxbaum JD, et al. Enhanced Striatal
Dopamine Transmission and Motor Performance with LRRK2 Overexpression in Mice Is Eliminated by
Familial Parkinson's Disease Mutation G2019S. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2010;30:1788.
[209] Melrose HL, Dächsel JC, Behrouz B, Lincoln SJ, Yue M, Hinkle KM, et al. Impaired dopaminergic
neurotransmission and microtubule-associated protein tau alterations in human LRRK2 transgenic
mice. Neurobiology of Disease. 2010;40:503-17.
[210] Winner B, Melrose HL, Zhao C, Hinkle KM, Yue M, Kent C, et al. Adult neurogenesis and neurite
outgrowth are impaired in LRRK2 G2019S mice. Neurobiology of Disease. 2011;41:706-16.
[211] Xu YH, Sun Y, Ran H, Quinn B, Witte D, Grabowski GA. Accumulation and distribution of α-
synuclein and ubiquitin in the CNS of Gaucher disease mouse models. Mol Genet Metab.
2011;102:436-47.
[212] Mistry PK, Liu J, Yang M, Nottoli T, McGrath J, Jain D, et al. Glucocerebrosidase gene-deficient
mouse recapitulates Gaucher disease displaying cellular and molecular dysregulation beyond the
macrophage. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2010;107:19473-8.
51

---PAGE BREAK---

[213] Burbulla LF, Song P, Mazzulli JR, Zampese E, Wong YC, Jeon S, et al. Dopamine oxidation mediates
mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. Science. 2017;357:1255-61.
[214] Chen L, Xie Z, Turkson S, Zhuang X. A53T human α-synuclein overexpression in transgenic mice
induces pervasive mitochondria macroautophagy defects preceding dopamine neuron degeneration.
J Neurosci. 2015;35:890-905.
[215] Gispert S, Del Turco D, Garrett L, Chen A, Bernard DJ, Hamm-Clement J, et al. Transgenic mice
expressing mutant A53T human alpha-synuclein show neuronal dysfunction in the absence of
aggregate formation. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003;24:419-29.
[216] Fares M-B, Maco B, Oueslati A, Rockenstein E, Ninkina N, Buchman VL, et al. Induction of de novo
α-synuclein fibrillization in a neuronal model for Parkinson’s disease. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2016;113:E912-E21.
[217] Taylor TN, Greene JG, Miller GW. Behavioral phenotyping of mouse models of Parkinson's
disease. Behav Brain Res. 2010;211:1-10.
[218] Chesselet MF, Richter F. Modelling of Parkinson's disease in mice. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:1108-
18.
[219] Dawson TM, Ko HS, Dawson VL. Genetic Animal Models of Parkinson's Disease. Neuron.
2010;66:646-61.
[220] Kriks S, Shim J-W, Piao J, Ganat YM, Wakeman DR, Xie Z, et al. Dopamine neurons derived from
human ES cells efficiently engraft in animal models of Parkinson’s disease. Nature. 2011;480:547-51.
[221] Byers B, Cord B, Nguyen HN, Schüle B, Fenno L, Lee PC, et al. SNCA triplication Parkinson's
patient's iPSC-derived DA neurons accumulate α-synuclein and are susceptible to oxidative stress. PLoS
One. 2011;6:e26159.
[222] Schöndorf DC, Aureli M, McAllister FE, Hindley CJ, Mayer F, Schmid B, et al. iPSC-derived neurons
from GBA1-associated Parkinson’s disease patients show autophagic defects and impaired calcium
homeostasis. Nature Communications. 2014;5:4028.
[223] Nguyen HN, Byers B, Cord B, Shcheglovitov A, Byrne J, Gujar P, et al. LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived
DA neurons demonstrate increased susceptibility to oxidative stress. Cell stem cell. 2011;8:267-80.
[224] Brazdis R-M, Alecu JE, Marsch D, Dahms A, Simmnacher K, Lörentz S, et al. Demonstration of
brain region-specific neuronal vulnerability in human iPSC-based model of familial Parkinson’s disease.
Human Molecular Genetics. 2020;29:1180-91.
[225] Krauskopf J, Eggermont K, Madeiro Da Costa RF, Bohler S, Hauser D, Caiment F, et al.
Transcriptomics analysis of human iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons reveals a novel model for
sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Molecular Psychiatry. 2022.
[226] Alekseenko Z, Dias JM, Adler AF, Kozhevnikova M, van Lunteren JA, Nolbrant S, et al. Robust
derivation of transplantable dopamine neurons from human pluripotent stem cells by timed retinoic
acid delivery. Nature Communications. 2022;13:3046.
[227] Krach F, Bogiongko M-E, Winner B. Decoding Parkinson's disease – iPSC-derived models in the
OMICs era. Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience. 2020;106:103501.
[228] Laperle AH, Sances S, Yucer N, Dardov VJ, Garcia VJ, Ho R, et al. iPSC modeling of young-onset
Parkinson’s disease reveals a molecular signature of disease and novel therapeutic candidates. Nature
Medicine. 2020;26:289-99.
[229] Kouroupi G, Taoufik E, Vlachos IS, Tsioras K, Antoniou N, Papastefanaki F, et al. Defective synaptic
connectivity and axonal neuropathology in a human iPSC-based model of familial Parkinson’s disease.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2017;114:E3679-E88.
[230] Torrent R, De Angelis Rigotti F, Dell’Era P, Memo M, Raya A, Consiglio A. Using iPS cells toward
the understanding of Parkinson’s disease. Journal of clinical medicine. 2015;4:548-66.
[231] Hartfield EM, Yamasaki-Mann M, Ribeiro Fernandes HJ, Vowles J, James WS, Cowley SA, et al.
Physiological Characterisation of Human iPS-Derived Dopaminergic Neurons. PLOS ONE.
2014;9:e87388.
[232] Sasai Y. Next-generation regenerative medicine: organogenesis from stem cells in 3D culture. Cell
Stem Cell. 2013;12:520-30.
52

---PAGE BREAK---

[233] Krencik R, Ullian E. A cellular star atlas: using astrocytes from human pluripotent stem cells for
disease studies. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience. 2013;7.
[234] Nedergaard M, Ransom B, Goldman SA. New roles for astrocytes: Redefining the functional
architecture of the brain. Trends in Neurosciences. 2003;26:523-30.
[235] Ricci G, Volpi L, Pasquali L, Petrozzi L, Siciliano G. Astrocyte–neuron interactions in neurological
disorders. Journal of Biological Physics. 2009;35:317-36.
[236] Zunke F, Mazzulli JR. Modeling neuronopathic storage diseases with patient-derived culture
systems. Neurobiology of Disease. 2019;127:147-62.
[237] Drobny A, Ngo PA, Neurath MF, Zunke F, López-Posadas R. Molecular Communication Between
Neuronal Networks and Intestinal Epithelial Cells in Gut Inflammation and Parkinson's Disease.
Frontiers in Medicine. 2021;8.
[238] Beck M. Treatment strategies for lysosomal storage disorders. Developmental Medicine & Child
Neurology. 2018;60:13-8.
[239] Edelmann MJ, Maegawa GHB. CNS-targeting therapies for lysosomal storage diseases: current
advances and challenges. Frontiers in molecular biosciences. 2020;7:559804.
[240] Beutler E, Kay A, Saven A, Garver P, Thurston D, Dawson A, et al. Enzyme replacement therapy
for Gaucher disease. Blood. 1991;78:1183-9.
[241] Ficicioglu C. Review of miglustat for clinical management in Gaucher disease type 1. Therapeutics
and clinical risk management. 2008;4:425.
[242] Li M. Enzyme Replacement Therapy: A Review and Its Role in Treating Lysosomal Storage
Diseases. Pediatric Annals. 2018;47:e191-e7.
[243] Bonam SR, Wang F, Muller S. Lysosomes as a therapeutic target. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery.
2019;18:923-48.
[244] Sugiman-Marangos SN, Beilhartz GL, Zhao X, Zhou D, Hua R, Kim PK, et al. Exploiting the
diphtheria toxin internalization receptor enhances delivery of proteins to lysosomes for enzyme
replacement therapy. Science advances. 2020;6:eabb0385.
[245] Schulz A, Ajayi T, Specchio N, de Los Reyes E, Gissen P, Ballon D, et al. Study of intraventricular
cerliponase alfa for CLN2 disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2018;378:1898-907.
[246] Massaro G, Geard AF, Liu W, Coombe-Tennant O, Waddington SN, Baruteau J, et al. Gene Therapy
for Lysosomal Storage Disorders: Ongoing Studies and Clinical Development. Biomolecules2021.
[247] Rocha EM, Smith GA, Park E, Cao H, Brown E, Hayes MA, et al. Glucocerebrosidase gene therapy
prevents α-synucleinopathy of midbrain dopamine neurons. Neurobiology of Disease. 2015;82:495-
503.
[248] Morabito G, Giannelli SG, Ordazzo G, Bido S, Castoldi V, Indrigo M, et al. AAV-PHP.B-Mediated
Global-Scale Expression in the Mouse Nervous System Enables GBA1 Gene Therapy for Wide
Protection from Synucleinopathy. Molecular Therapy. 2017;25:2727-42.
[249] Leal AF, Espejo-Mojica AJ, Sánchez OF, Ramírez CM, Reyes LH, Cruz JC, et al. Lysosomal storage
diseases: current therapies and future alternatives. Journal of Molecular Medicine. 2020;98:931-46.
[250] Parenti G, Andria G, Valenzano KJ. Pharmacological chaperone therapy: preclinical development,
clinical translation, and prospects for the treatment of lysosomal storage disorders. Molecular
Therapy. 2015;23:1138-48.
[251] Valenzano KJ, Khanna R, Powe Jr AC, Boyd R, Lee G, Flanagan JJ, et al. Identification and
characterization of pharmacological chaperones to correct enzyme deficiencies in lysosomal storage
disorders. Assay and drug development technologies. 2011;9:213-35.
[252] Benjamin ER, Della Valle MC, Wu X, Katz E, Pruthi F, Bond S, et al. The validation of
pharmacogenetics for the identification of Fabry patients to be treated with migalastat. Genetics in
Medicine. 2017;19:430-8.
[253] Porto C, Ferrara MC, Meli M, Acampora E, Avolio V, Rosa M, et al. Pharmacological enhancement
of α-glucosidase by the allosteric chaperone N-acetylcysteine. Molecular Therapy. 2012;20:2201-11.
[254] Mazzulli JR, Zunke F, Tsunemi T, Toker NJ, Jeon S, Burbulla LF, et al. Activation of β-
glucocerebrosidase reduces pathological α-synuclein and restores lysosomal function in Parkinson's
patient midbrain neurons. Journal of Neuroscience. 2016;36:7693-706.
53

---PAGE BREAK---

[255] Aflaki E, Borger DK, Moaven N, Stubblefield BK, Rogers SA, Patnaik S, et al. A new
glucocerebrosidase chaperone reduces α-synuclein and glycolipid levels in iPSC-derived dopaminergic
neurons from patients with Gaucher disease and parkinsonism. Journal of Neuroscience.
2016;36:7441-52.
[256] Burbulla LF, Jeon S, Zheng J, Song P, Silverman RB, Krainc D. A modulator of wild-type
glucocerebrosidase improves pathogenic phenotypes in dopaminergic neuronal models of Parkinson’s
disease. Science translational medicine. 2019;11:eaau6870.
[257] Ambrosi G, Ghezzi C, Zangaglia R, Levandis G, Pacchetti C, Blandini F. Ambroxol-induced rescue
of defective glucocerebrosidase is associated with increased LIMP-2 and saposin C levels in GBA1
mutant Parkinson's disease cells. Neurobiology of disease. 2015;82:235-42.
[258] Maegawa GHB, Tropak MB, Buttner JD, Rigat BA, Fuller M, Pandit D, et al. Identification and
characterization of ambroxol as an enzyme enhancement agent for Gaucher disease. Journal of
Biological Chemistry. 2009;284:23502-16.
[259] Sanchez-Martinez A, Beavan M, Gegg ME, Chau K-Y, Whitworth AJ, Schapira AHV. Parkinson
disease-linked GBA mutation effects reversed by molecular chaperones in human cell and fly models.
Scientific reports. 2016;6:1-12.
[260] Magalhaes J, Gegg ME, Migdalska-Richards A, Schapira AH. Effects of ambroxol on the
autophagy-lysosome pathway and mitochondria in primary cortical neurons. Scientific reports.
2018;8:1-12.
[261] Migdalska-Richards A, Daly L, Bezard E, Schapira AHV. Ambroxol effects in glucocerebrosidase
and α-synuclein transgenic mice. Annals of neurology. 2016;80:766-75.
[262] Kopytova AE, Rychkov GN, Nikolaev MA, Baydakova GV, Cheblokov AA, Senkevich KA, et al.
Ambroxol increases glucocerebrosidase (GCase) activity and restores GCase translocation in primary
patient-derived macrophages in Gaucher disease and Parkinsonism. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders.
2021;84:112-21.
[263] Gegg ME, Menozzi E, Schapira AHV. Glucocerebrosidase-associated Parkinson disease:
Pathogenic mechanisms and potential drug treatments. Neurobiology of Disease. 2022;166:105663.
[264] Mullin S, Smith L, Lee K, D’Souza G, Woodgate P, Elflein J, et al. Ambroxol for the treatment of
patients with Parkinson disease with and without glucocerebrosidase gene mutations: a
nonrandomized, noncontrolled trial. JAMA neurology. 2020;77:427-34.
[265] Coutinho MF, Santos JI, Alves S. Less is more: substrate reduction therapy for lysosomal storage
disorders. International journal of molecular sciences. 2016;17:1065.
[266] Belmatoug N, Di Rocco M, Fraga C, Giraldo P, Hughes D, Lukina E, et al. Management and
monitoring recommendations for the use of eliglustat in adults with type 1 Gaucher disease in Europe.
European Journal of Internal Medicine. 2017;37:25-32.
[267] Platt FM. Emptying the stores: lysosomal diseases and therapeutic strategies. Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery. 2018;17:133-50.
[268] Treiber A, Morand O, Clozel M. The pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of the
glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor miglustat in the rat. Xenobiotica. 2007;37:298-314.
[269] Schiffmann R, Fitz Gibbon EJ, Harris C, DeVile C, Davies EH, Abel L, et al. Randomized, controlled
trial of miglustat in Gaucher's disease type 3. Annals of Neurology: Official Journal of the American
Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society. 2008;64:514-22.
[270] Zunke F, Moise AC, Belur NR, Gelyana E, Stojkovska I, Dzaferbegovic H, et al. Reversible
Conformational Conversion of α-Synuclein into Toxic Assemblies by Glucosylceramide. Neuron.
2018;97:92-107.e10.
[271] Sardi SP, Viel C, Clarke J, Treleaven CM, Richards AM, Park H, et al. Glucosylceramide synthase
inhibition alleviates aberrations in synucleinopathy models. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 2017;114:2699-704.
[272] Vidoni C, Follo C, Savino M, Melone MAB, Isidoro C. The role of cathepsin D in the pathogenesis
of human neurodegenerative disorders. Medicinal research reviews. 2016;36:845-70.
54

---PAGE BREAK---

[273] Cuddy LK, Wani WY, Morella ML, Pitcairn C, Tsutsumi K, Fredriksen K, et al. Stress-induced cellular
clearance is mediated by the SNARE protein ykt6 and disrupted by α-Synuclein. Neuron. 2019;104:869-
84.
[274] Torra A, Parent A, Cuadros T, Rodríguez-Galván B, Ruiz-Bronchal E, Ballabio A, et al.
Overexpression of TFEB Drives a Pleiotropic Neurotrophic Effect and Prevents Parkinson's Disease-
Related Neurodegeneration. Molecular Therapy. 2018;26:1552-67.
[275] Kilpatrick K, Zeng Y, Hancock T, Segatori L. Genetic and Chemical Activation of TFEB Mediates
Clearance of Aggregated α-Synuclein. PLOS ONE. 2015;10:e0120819.
[276] Klein AD, Mazzulli JR. Is Parkinson’s disease a lysosomal disorder? Brain. 2018;141:2255-62.
[277] Lloyd KG. CNS Compensation to Dopamine Neuron Loss in Parkinson’s Disease. In: Messiha FS,
Kenny AD, editors. Parkinson’s Disease: Neurophysiological, Clinical, and Related Aspects. New York,
NY: Springer US; 1977. p. 255-66.
[278] Filocamo M, Morrone A. Lysosomal storage disorders: Molecular basis and laboratory testing.
Human Genomics. 2011;5:156.
[279] Udayar V, Chen Y, Sidransky E, Jagasia R. Lysosomal dysfunction in neurodegeneration: emerging
concepts and methods. Trends in Neurosciences. 2022;45:184-99.
[280] Breydo L, Wu JW, Uversky VN. α-Synuclein misfolding and Parkinson's disease. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease. 2012;1822:261-85.
[281] Ramirez A, Heimbach A, Gründemann J, Stiller B, Hampshire D, Cid LP, et al. Hereditary
parkinsonism with dementia is caused by mutations in ATP13A2, encoding a lysosomal type 5 P-type
ATPase. Nature genetics. 2006;38:1184-91.
[282] Stoka V, Turk V, Turk B. Lysosomal cathepsins and their regulation in aging and
neurodegeneration. Ageing Research Reviews. 2016;32:22-37.
[283] Davidson Y, Gibbons L, Pritchard A, Hardicre J, Wren J, Tian J, et al. Genetic associations between
cathepsin D exon 2 C→ T polymorphism and Alzheimer’s disease, and pathological correlations with
genotype. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry. 2006;77:515-7.
[284] Li L, Wang X, Fei X, Xia L, Qin Z, Liang Z. Parkinson's disease involves autophagy and abnormal
distribution of cathepsin L. Neuroscience Letters. 2011;489:62-7.
[285] Zhang Z, Xie M, Ye K. Asparagine endopeptidase is an innovative therapeutic target for
neurodegenerative diseases. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2016;20:1237-45.
[286] Zhang Z, Song M, Liu X, Kang SS, Kwon I-S, Duong DM, et al. Cleavage of tau by asparagine
endopeptidase mediates the neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer's disease. Nature medicine.
2014;20:1254-62.
[287] Poeppel P, Habetha M, Marcão A, Büssow H, Berna L, Gieselmann V. Missense mutations as a
cause of metachromatic leukodystrophy. The FEBS Journal. 2005;272:1179-88.
[288] Garrido E, Cormand B, Hopwood JJ, Chabás A, Grinberg D, Vilageliu L. Maroteaux–Lamy
syndrome: Functional characterization of pathogenic mutations and polymorphisms in the
arylsulfatase B gene. Molecular Genetics and Metabolism. 2008;94:305-12.
[289] Fluharty AL, Meek WE, Kihara H. Pseudo arylsulfatase a deficiency: Evidence for a structurally
altered enzyme. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications. 1983;112:191-7.
[290] Park J-H, Schuchman EH. Acid ceramidase and human disease. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
(BBA) - Biomembranes. 2006;1758:2133-8.
[291] Willems PJ, Seo H-C, Coucke P, Tonlorenzi R, O'Brien JS. Spectrum of mutations in fucosidosis.
European Journal of Human Genetics. 1999;7:60-7.
[292] Endreffy I, Bjørklund G, Szerafin L, Chirumbolo S, Urbina MA, Endreffy E. Plasma alpha-L-
fucosidase activity in chronic inflammation and autoimmune disorders in a pediatric cohort of
hospitalized patients. Immunologic Research. 2017;65:1025-30.
[293] Suzuki K. Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy (Krabbe's Disease): Update. Journal of Child Neurology.
2003;18:595-603.
[294] Tohru Y, Shintaro O, Tomochika K, Koji I, Hyakuji Y. Galactose 6-sulfate sulfatase activity in
Morquio syndrome. Clinica Chimica Acta. 1982;122:169-80.
55

---PAGE BREAK---

[295] Blauwendraat C, Reed X, Krohn L, Heilbron K, Bandres-Ciga S, Tan M, et al. Genetic modifiers of
risk and age at onset in GBA associated Parkinson’s disease and Lewy body dementia. Brain.
2020;143:234-48.
[296] Sidransky E. Gaucher disease: insights from a rare Mendelian disorder. Discov Med. 2012;14:273-
81.
[297] Sweeley CC, Klionsky B. Fabry's Disease: Classification as a Sphingolipidosis and Partial
Characterization of a Novel Glycolipid. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1963;238:PC3148-PC50.
[298] De Brabander I, Yperzeele L, Ceuterick-De Groote C, Brouns R, Baker R, Belachew S, et al.
Phenotypical characterization of α-galactosidase A gene mutations identified in a large Fabry disease
screening program in stroke in the young. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery. 2013;115:1088-93.
[299] Mok A, Cao H, Hegele RA. Genomic basis of mucopolysaccharidosis type IIID (MIM 252940)
revealed by sequencing of GNS encoding N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase. Genomics. 2003;81:1-5.
[300] Tomatsu S, Montaño AM, Dung VC, Grubb JH, Sly WS. Mutations and polymorphisms in GUSB
gene in mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly Syndrome). Human Mutation. 2009;30:511-9.
[301] Lemieux MJ, Mark BL, Cherney MM, Withers SG, Mahuran DJ, James MNG. Crystallographic
Structure of Human β-Hexosaminidase A: Interpretation of Tay-Sachs Mutations and Loss of GM2
Ganglioside Hydrolysis. Journal of Molecular Biology. 2006;359:913-29.
[302] Gomez-Lira M, Sangalli A, Mottes M, Perusi C, Pignatti PF, Rizzuto N, et al. A common β
hexosaminidase gene mutation in adult Sandhoff disease patients. Human Genetics. 1995;96:417-22.
[303] Bunge S, Steglich C, Beck M, Rosenkranz W, Schwinger E, Hopwood JJ, et al. Mutation analysis of
the iduronate-2-sulfatase gene in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II (Hunter syndrome).
Human Molecular Genetics. 1992;1:335-9.
[304] Wraith JE, Scarpa M, Beck M, Bodamer OA, De Meirleir L, Guffon N, et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis
type II (Hunter syndrome): a clinical review and recommendations for treatment in the era of enzyme
replacement therapy. European Journal of Pediatrics. 2008;167:267-77.
[305] Scott HS, Litjens T, Nelson PV, Thompson PR, Brooks DA, Hopwood JJ, et al. Identification of
mutations in the alpha-L-iduronidase gene (IDUA) that cause Hurler and Scheie syndromes. Am J Hum
Genet. 1993;53:973-86.
[306] Desnick RJ, Wang AM. Schindler Disease: an Inherited Neuroaxonal Dystrophy due to α-N-
Acetylgalactosaminidase Deficiency. In: Harkness RA, Pollitt RJ, Addison GM, editors. Carbohydrate and
Glycoprotein Metabolism; Maternal Phenylketonuria. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 1990. p. 549-
59.
[307] Sakuraba H, Matsuzawa F, Aikawa S-i, Doi H, Kotani M, Nakada H, et al. Structural and
immunocytochemical studies on α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency (Schindler/Kanzaki disease).
Journal of Human Genetics. 2004;49:1-8.
[308] Kamp JJPVD, Niermeijer MF, Figura KV, Giesberts MAH. Genetic heterogeneity and clinical
variability in the Sanfilippo syndrome (types A, B, and C). Clinical Genetics. 1981;20:152-60.
[309] Winder-Rhodes SE, Garcia-Reitböck P, Ban M, Evans JR, Jacques TS, Kemppinen A, et al. Genetic
and pathological links between Parkinson's disease and the lysosomal disorder Sanfilippo syndrome.
Movement Disorders. 2012;27:312-5.
[310] Cantz M, Gehler J, Spranger J. Mucolipidosis I: Increased sialic acid content and deficiency of an
α-N-acetylneuraminidase in cultured fibroblasts. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications. 1977;74:732-8.
[311] Schuchman EH. The pathogenesis and treatment of acid sphingomyelinase-deficient Niemann–
Pick disease. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease. 2007;30:654.
[312] Mangieri LR, Mader BJ, Thomas CE, Taylor CA, Luker AM, Tse TE, et al. ATP6V0C Knockdown in
Neuroblastoma Cells Alters Autophagy-Lysosome Pathway Function and Metabolism of Proteins that
Accumulate in Neurodegenerative Disease. PLOS ONE. 2014;9:e93257.
[313] Ramonet D, Podhajska A, Stafa K, Sonnay S, Trancikova A, Tsika E, et al. PARK9-associated
ATP13A2 localizes to intracellular acidic vesicles and regulates cation homeostasis and neuronal
integrity. Human Molecular Genetics. 2012;21:1725-43.
56

---PAGE BREAK---

[314] Kämäläinen A, Viswanathan J, Natunen T, Helisalmi S, Kauppinen T, Pikkarainen M, et al. GRN
variant rs5848 reduces plasma and brain levels of granulin in Alzheimer's disease patients. Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease. 2013;33:23-7.
[315] Mackenzie IRA, Baker M, Pickering-Brown S, Hsiung G-YR, Lindholm C, Dwosh E, et al. The
neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration caused by mutations in the progranulin gene.
Brain. 2006;129:3081-90.
[316] Paushter DH, Du H, Feng T, Hu F. The lysosomal function of progranulin, a guardian against
neurodegeneration. Acta Neuropathologica. 2018;136:1-17.
[317] Snowden JS, Pickering-Brown SM, Mackenzie IR, Richardson AMT, Varma A, Neary D, et al.
Progranulin gene mutations associated with frontotemporal dementia and progressive non-fluent
aphasia. Brain. 2006;129:3091-102.
[318] Evans P-RCJS. EW Gilks WP Simon J. van der Brug M. Lopez de Munain A. Aparicio S. Gil AM Khan
N. Cloning of the gene containing mutations that cause PARK8-linked Parkinson's disease. Neuron.
2004;44:595-600.
[319] Schapira AHV. The Importance of LRRK2 Mutations in Parkinson Disease. Archives of Neurology.
2006;63:1225-8.
[320] Lu YW, Tan E-K. Molecular biology changes associated with LRRK2 mutations in Parkinson's
disease. Journal of Neuroscience Research. 2008;86:1895-901.
[321] Wallings R, Connor-Robson N, Wade-Martins R. LRRK2 interacts with the vacuolar-type H+-
ATPase pump a1 subunit to regulate lysosomal function. Human Molecular Genetics. 2019;28:2696-
710.
[322] Bassi MT, Manzoni M, Monti E, Pizzo MT, Ballabio A, Borsani G. Cloning of the gene encoding a
novel integral membrane protein, mucolipidin—and identification of the two major founder mutations
causing mucolipidosis type IV. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2000;67:1110-20.
[323] Pollmanns MR, Dinter E, Schulz JB, Falkenburger B. Activated endolysosomal cation channel
TRPML1 reduces α-synuclein load in a cellular model for Parkinson's Disease. Parkinsonism & Related
Disorders. 2020;79:e3.
[324] Brady RO, Kanfer JN, Mock MB, Fredrickson DS. The metabolism of sphingomyelin. II. Evidence
of an enzymatic deficiency in Niemann-Pick diseae. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
1966;55:366-9.
[325] Kluenemann HH, Nutt JG, Davis MY, Bird TD. Parkinsonism syndrome in heterozygotes for
Niemann–Pick C1. Journal of the Neurological Sciences. 2013;335:219-20.
[326] Zech M, Nübling G, Castrop F, Jochim A, Schulte EC, Mollenhauer B, et al. Niemann-Pick C Disease
Gene Mutations and Age-Related Neurodegenerative Disorders. PLOS ONE. 2014;8:e82879.
[327] Verheijen FW, Verbeek E, Aula N, Beerens CEMT, Havelaar AC, Joosse M, et al. A new gene,
encoding an anion transporter, is mutated in sialic acid storage diseases. Nature Genetics.
1999;23:462-5.
[328] Strehle EM. Sialic Acid Storage Disease and Related Disorders. Genetic Testing. 2003;7:113-21.
[329] Cortes CJ, La Spada AR. TFEB dysregulation as a driver of autophagy dysfunction in
neurodegenerative disease: Molecular mechanisms, cellular processes, and emerging therapeutic
opportunities. Neurobiology of Disease. 2019;122:83-93.
[330] Sardiello M, Palmieri M, di Ronza A, Medina DL, Valenza M, Gennarino VA, et al. A Gene Network
Regulating Lysosomal Biogenesis and Function. Science. 2009;325:473-7.
[331] Settembre C, Di Malta C, Polito VA, Arencibia MG, Vetrini F, Erdin S, et al. TFEB Links Autophagy
to Lysosomal Biogenesis. Science. 2011;332:1429-33.
[332] Fan X, Zhang H, Zhang S, Bagshaw RD, Tropak MB, Callahan JW, et al. Identification of the Gene
Encoding the Enzyme Deficient in Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIC (Sanfilippo Disease Type C). The
American Journal of Human Genetics. 2006;79:738-44.
[333] Dumitriu A, Pacheco CD, Wilk JB, Strathearn KE, Latourelle JC, Goldwurm S, et al. Cyclin-G-
associated kinase modifies α-synuclein expression levels and toxicity in Parkinson's disease: results
from the GenePD Study. Human Molecular Genetics. 2011;20:1478-87.
57

---PAGE BREAK---

[334] Coutinho MF, Prata MJ, Alves S. Mannose-6-phosphate pathway: A review on its role in lysosomal
function and dysfunction. Molecular Genetics and Metabolism. 2012;105:542-50.
[335] Seabra MC, Mules EH, Hume AN. Rab GTPases, intracellular traffic and disease. Trends in
Molecular Medicine. 2002;8:23-30.
[336] Berkovic SF, Dibbens LM, Oshlack A, Silver JD, Katerelos M, Vears DF, et al. Array-based gene
discovery with three unrelated subjects shows SCARB2/LIMP-2 deficiency causes myoclonus epilepsy
and glomerulosclerosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2008;82:673-84.
58

---PAGE BREAK---

59

---PAGE BREAK---

From lysosomal storage disorders to Parkinson’s Disease –
Challenges and opportunities
Rebecca Mächtel1, Fanni Annamaria Boros1, Jan Philipp Dobert1, Philipp Arnold2 and
Friederike Zunke1
1Department of Molecular Neurology, University Clinics Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
2Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-
Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany
Research Highlights:
 Insufficient lysosomal turnover leads to accumulation of substrates and associated
lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs)
 Lysosomal (dys)functions correlates to Parkinson’s disease (PD)
 LSDs and PD share common cellular pathomechanisms
 Methodical challenges in the determination of lysosomal enzyme function
 Potential of targeting lysosomal pathways for diagnosis and treatment of LSDs and PD
60

---PAGE BREAK---

Declaration of interests
☒ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
☐The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests:
61

---PAGE BREAK---

