Position Paper
A biological definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease:
towards an integrated staging system for research
Tanya Simuni*, Lana M Chahine*, Kathleen Poston, Michael Brumm, Teresa Buracchio, Michelle Campbell, Sohini Chowdhury, Christopher Coffey,
Luis Concha-Marambio, Tien Dam, Peter DiBiaso, Tatiana Foroud, Mark Frasier, Caroline Gochanour, Danna Jennings, Karl Kieburtz,
Catherine M Kopil, Kalpana Merchant, Brit Mollenhauer, Thomas Montine, Kelly Nudelman, Gennaro Pagano, John Seibyl, Todd Sherer,
Andrew Singleton, Diane Stephenson, Matthew Stern, Claudio Soto, Caroline M Tanner, Eduardo Tolosa, Daniel Weintraub, Yuge Xiao,
Andrew Siderowf, Billy Dunn, Kenneth Marek
Lancet Neurol 2024; 23: 178–90 Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies are currently defined by their clinical features, with α-synuclein
See Comment pages 129 and 133 pathology as the gold standard to establish the definitive diagnosis. We propose that, given biomarker advances
*Contributed equally enabling accurate detection of pathological α-synuclein (ie, misfolded and aggregated) in CSF using the seed
amplification assay, it is time to redefine Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies as neuronal α-synuclein
Department of Neurology,
Northwestern University disease rather than as clinical syndromes. This major shift from a clinical to a biological definition of Parkinson’s
Feinberg School of Medicine, disease and dementia with Lewy bodies takes advantage of the availability of tools to assess the gold standard for
Chicago, IL, USA (T Simuni MD,
diagnosis of neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn) in human beings during life. Neuronal α-synuclein disease is defined by
K Merchant PhD); Department
the presence of pathological n-αsyn species detected in vivo (S; the first biological anchor) regardless of the presence
of Neurology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA of any specific clinical syndrome. On the basis of this definition, we propose that individuals with pathological n-αsyn
(L M Chahine MD); Department aggregates are at risk for dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction (D; the second biological anchor). Our biological
of Neurology, Stanford
definition establishes a staging system, the neuronal α-synuclein disease integrated staging system (NSD-ISS), rooted
University School of Medicine,
Palo Alto, CA, USA in the biological anchors (S and D) and the degree of functional impairment caused by clinical signs or symptoms.
(K Poston MD); Department of Stages 0–1 occur without signs or symptoms and are defined by the presence of pathogenic variants in the SNCA
Biostatistics, College of Public gene (stage 0), S alone (stage 1A), or S and D (stage 1B). The presence of clinical manifestations marks the transition
Health, University of Iowa,
to stage 2 and beyond. Stage 2 is characterised by subtle signs or symptoms but without functional impairment.
Iowa City, IA, USA
(M Brumm MS, C Coffey PhD, Stages 2B–6 require both S and D and stage-specific increases in functional impairment. A biological definition of
C Gochanour MS); Center for neuronal α-synuclein disease and an NSD-ISS research framework are essential to enable interventional trials at early
Drug Evaluation and Research, disease stages. The NSD-ISS will evolve to include the incorporation of data-driven definitions of stage-specific
Food and Drug Administration,
functional anchors and additional biomarkers as they emerge and are validated. Presently, the NSD-ISS is intended
Silver Spring, MD, USA
(T Buracchio MD, for research use only; its application in the clinical setting is premature and inappropriate.
M Campbell PhD);
The Michael J Fox Foundation Introduction optimisation and validation2–6 has been a landmark
for Parkinson’s Research
Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies are advancement for the field. We propose that, given our
(S Chowdhury MA, M Frasier PhD,
C M Kopil PhD, T Sherer PhD, currently defined by their clinical features, with detection ability to detect n-αsyn using this seed amplification
Y Xiao BSc, B Dunn MD), Patient of α-synuclein pathology used as the gold standard to assay, it is time to redefine Parkinson’s disease and
Advisory Council establish a definitive diagnosis. Numerous clinical dementia with Lewy bodies on the basis of biology rather
(P DiBasio MHSA), New York,
diagnostic criteria have been proposed over decades and than clinical features. We recognise that a biological
NY, USA; Amprion, San Diego,
CA, USA widely used to classify individuals with Parkinson’s definition for Parkinson’s disease and dementia with
(L Concha-Marambio PhD, disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Clinical staging, Lewy bodies is a major shift, but we believe that reflects
C Soto PhD); Biogen, such as the Hoehn and Yahr scale, has been developed the availability of tools to establish the gold standard
Cambridge, MA, USA
and used to describe disease severity. Our concerns about diagnosis during life.
(T Dam MD); Clinical Solutions
and Strategic Partnerships, these clinical definitions and staging are two-fold. First, We suggest that a biological definition can combine
WCG Clinical, Princeton, NJ, USA the clinical syndromes and clinical progression are Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies
(P DiBiaso); Department heterogenous, with overlap among disorders. Second, under the term neuronal α-synuclein disease, on the
of Medical and Molecular
converging biomarker, clinical, epidemiological, and basis of in vivo detection of n-αsyn (S). We further
Genetics, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, IN, USA neuro pathological data show that pathology begins long propose that individuals with n-αsyn are at high risk for
(T Foroud PhD, before any symptoms or signs, but clinical criteria cannot developing dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction (D), a
K Nudelman PhD); Denali
define Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy bodies second key biological anchor for neuronal α-synuclein
Therapeutics, San Francisco, CA,
during this prolonged period of neurodegeneration. disease. Defining neuronal α-synuclein disease by its
USA (D Jennings MD BS);
Department of Neurology, These concerns could be addressed by use of biology is crucial to further understand pathophysiology,
University of Rochester Medical biomarkers that measure misfolded, predominantly to enable biology-specific therapeutic development7 and
Center, Rochester, NY, USA
neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn), the neuropathological therapeutic intervention before symptom onset to
(K Kieburtz, MD MPH);
hallmark of Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy potentially prevent or halt progression,8 and to identify
Department of Neurology,
University Medical Center bodies (panel 1). Until recently, n-αsyn could only be biologically defined groups.9
Göttingen and Paracelsus- reliably measured post mortem. In 2016, a seed Two centuries after Parkinson’s disease was first
Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany
amplification assay1 was developed, which could detect described,10 and three decades since the term dementia
(B Mollenhauer MD);
n-αsyn in vivo with high accuracy. Its rapid, rigorous with Lewy bodies was proposed,11 the knowledge and tools
178 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
are now available to allow the redefinition of these entities Department of Pathology,
on the basis of biology and conceptualisation of a staging Panel 1: Glossary of terms Stanford University School of
system rooted in biology. We propose an integrated Neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn) Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
(T Montine MD PhD);
biological and clinical staging system for neuronal Disease-defining form of α-synuclein: pathological (ie, F Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel,
α-synuclein disease that begins when it is still misfolded and aggregated), predominantly neuronal Switzerland
asymptomatic, and continues through the development α-synuclein (G Pagano MD PhD); Institute
for Neurodegenerative
of increasing functional impairment. The key rationale
Neuronal α-synuclein disease Disorders, New Haven, CT, USA
for a staging system is to accelerate therapeutic
(J Seibyl MD, K Marek MD);
Disease defined by presence of n-αsyn and dopaminergic
development in all disease stages, by including in National Institute on Aging,
research studies participants without symptoms on the dysfunction, independent of presence of clinical signs and National Institutes of Health,
symptoms Bethesda, MD, USA
basis of their biomarker profiles, as well as those in later
(A Singleton PhD); Critical Path
stages, anchored by clinical features. Our approach of S anchor for neuronal α-synuclein disease (S) for Parkinson’s, Critical Path
defining the disease on the basis of biology and Indicates presence (S+) or absence (S–) of n-αsyn as measured Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA
biomarkers builds on similar efforts in other by any validated biomarker of n-αsyn pathology (D Stephenson PhD);
Department of Neurology,
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s
Perelman School of Medicine,
disease12,13 and Huntington’s disease.14 D anchor for neuronal α-synuclein disease (D) University of Pennsylvania,
In this Position Paper, we present the definition of Indicates presence (D+) or absence (D–) of dopaminergic Philadelphia, PA, USA
neuronal α-synuclein disease and our concept for the dysfunction as measured by any validated biomarker of (M Stern MD, A Siderowf MD);
neuronal α-synuclein disease integrated staging system dopaminergic dysfunction Mitchell Center for Alzheimer’s
Disease and Related Brain
(NSD-ISS), providing examples of how this proposed Genetic status (G) Disorders, Department of
biological definition and staging system will advance the Indicates presence (G+) or absence (G–) of relevant Neurology, University of Texas
field. We also propose that a conceptual framework for pathogenic variants McGovern Medical School at
Houston, Houston, TX, USA
neuronal α-synuclein disease staging is crucial to
(C Soto); Movement Disorders
accelerate drug development, just as Alzheimer’s disease α-synuclein seed amplification assay and Neuromodulation Center,
staging has accelerated drug development. This inaugural An assay that leverages the self-replicating properties of Department of Neurology,
version of the NSD-ISS is intended for research use only; misfolded α-synuclein by means of fragmentation and Weill Institute for
its application in the clinical setting is premature and elongation cycles Neuroscience, University of
California, San Francisco, CA,
inappropriate. We urge the research community to work α-synucleinopathies USA (C M Tanner MD PhD);
together to provide the data to test this concept fully. We Parkinson’s Disease Research
A group of neurodegenerative diseases marked by
also highlight key outstanding questions and opportunities Education and Clinical Center,
histopathological evidence of pathological aggregates of
San Francisco Veterans Affairs
for the NSD-ISS to facilitate further investigation, which misfolded α-synuclein Health Care System,
in turn will inform future iterations of the staging system. San Francisco, CA, USA
(C M Tanner); Parkinson’s
Development process stakeholders, including an expanded group of neuro- Disease and Movement
Disorders Unit, Neurology
Details on the process for the development of our science and clinical experts in α-synucleinopathies, patient
Service, Hospital Clínic de
definition and the NSD-ISS are provided in the community members, public–private partnership groups, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
appendix (p 1). Briefly, in 2022, in the context of broad repres entatives from industry and regulatory agencies, (E Tolosa MD); Centro de
consensus among a range of stakeholders in research of and additional patient advocacy groups. These events led Investigación Biomédica en
Red Sobre Enfermedades
neurodegenerative disease that a biological definition and to several key revisions to the NSD-ISS. The draft Position
Neurodegenerativas, Hospital
a staging of α-synucleinopathies were crucial to advancing Paper was posted on The Michael J Fox Foundation for Clínic, IDIBAPS, Universitat de
therapeutic development,15 a working group was Parkinson’s Research website between June 21, 2023, and Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
(E Tolosa); University of
assembled under the auspices of The Michael J Fox July 19, 2023, for public comment, and key feedback was
Pennsylvania and the
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. This working group then incorporated.
Parkinson’s Disease and Mental
included international neuroscience and clinical experts, Illness Research, Education and
industry sponsors, non-profit organisations, regulatory Proposed unifying terminology Clinical Centers, Philadelphia
Veterans Affairs Medical Center
authorities, and representatives of the patient community. Neuronal α-synucleinopathies, defined by accumulation
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Focusing on an approach grounded in existing data, the of disease-specific16–18 pathological α-synuclein pre-
(D Weintraub MD)
objectives were to develop a biological definition and a dominantly in neuronal cell bodies and neurites (Lewy
Correspondence to:
framework that delineates disease stages to accelerate bodies and Lewy neurites), can be asymptomatic or can Dr Tanya Simuni, Department of
targeted therapeutics, and to identify key gaps in manifest clinically with parkinsonism, cognitive Neurology, Northwestern
University Feinberg
knowledge. Following a series of virtual meetings, a face- impairment, and an array of other motor and non-motor
School of Medicine,
to-face conference was held from Jan 25 to Jan 26, 2023. manifestations. Based on the sequence and progression
Chicago, IL 60611, USA
Following this conference and a series of weekly virtual of clinical signs or symptoms, individuals have been tsimuni@nm.org
meetings, seven international non-profit organisations, designated with varying terms,19–26 such as incidental See Online for appendix
including The Michael J Fox Foundation, supported a Lewy body disease,27 preclinical (without clinical features),
face-to-face roundtable and subsequent virtual summit. premotor, pure autonomic failure, idiopathic rapid eye
These events were held in April, 2023, with diverse movement-sleep behaviour disorder, prodromal (early
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 179

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
signs or symptoms not yet fulfilling clinical diagnostic bodies,5,35 and identifies individuals with clinical signs or
criteria), or as having a possible or probable clinical symptoms of Parkinson’s disease and dementia with
diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease Lewy bodies with high accuracy.2–4,6 The seed amplification
dementia, or dementia with Lewy bodies. We propose assay also detects n-αsyn in individuals with idiopathic
neuronal α-synuclein disease as a new unifying term rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder, olfactory
defined by biology to encompass all α-synucleinopathies or autonomic dysfunction, and genetic risk who are most
with n-αsyn—ie, predominantly neuronal deposition of likely to progress to clinically defined disease.2,36–38
misfolded pathological α-synuclein. Importantly, a positive CSF α-synuclein seed amplification
assay in individuals39 who do not have cognitive
Definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease impairment and in individuals with isolated hyposmia40
Neuronal α-synuclein disease is defined by the presence was associated with progression to clinically defined
of n-αsyn (S) and stage-dependent evidence of α-synucleinopathies within 4–6 years. Critically, this assay
dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction (D). Additionally, can distinguish n-αsyn from other α-synuclein forms,
presence of fully penetrant pathogenic variants in the specifically those associated with the predominantly glial
SNCA gene (G) is sufficient for the diagnosis of neuronal pathology of multiple system atrophy.41,42 Standard
α-synuclein disease. The current measures used to operating procedures and best practices for biospecimen
determine an individual’s S or D status are categorical handling43 are crucial for the accurate application of
(positive or negative), but are anticipated to become α-synuclein seed amplification assay. Currently, the most
quantitative as the field evolves. Central tenets of our widely applied assay2,44 uses maximal fluorescence emitted
definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease are: the disease during aggregation to define positivity for n-αsyn and
is defined biologically on the basis of objective in-vivo distinguish neuronal α-synuclein disease from healthy
biomarkers; the disease can be diagnosed in the absence individuals and those with multiple system atrophy.
of clinical manifestations; and clinical manifestations in Several other measures of n-αsyn are being studied,
the absence of biomarkers are not sufficient to diagnose and it is expected that other reliable n-asyn biomarkers
the disease. will emerge. These biomarkers include seed amplification
assays in other matrices, such as blood and peripheral
The biological anchors of the NSD-ISS tissue.3,31,45–47 Other measures of n-αsyn also hold promise.
S anchor: n-αsyn Immuno histo chemical detection of phosphorylated
The presence of n-αsyn (S+) is the defining feature of n-αsyn in skin biopsies has high accuracy for
neuronal α-synuclein disease and is key to the NSD-ISS distinguishing neuronal α-synuclein disease from healthy
framework. Over a century ago, Lewy bodies were controls48,49 and clinically diagnosed Parkinson’s disease
identified as the pathological hallmark of disorders now from multiple system atrophy.46,50 Furthermore, disease-
encompassed in the definition of neuronal α-synuclein specific post-translational modifications of α-synuclein
disease.28 Landmark discoveries included the and exosome-derived α-synuclein biomarkers are also
identification of the Ala53Thr SNCA variant as a cause being studied.31 The NSD-ISS research framework
for Parkinson’s disease and determination that enables incorporation of any emerging measures
α-synuclein was the core constituent of Lewy bodies and alongside, or instead of, the seed amplification assay to
Lewy neurites.29 The key role of n-αsyn pathology is well determine the presence of n-αsyn (S) once they have been
established based on extensive pathological, molecular, rigorously replicated and validated.
and genetic evidence in animal models and in humans.30 A major goal is to develop quantitative measures of
Any rigorously validated biomarker of n-αsyn can be n-αsyn. Intensive efforts are also underway to develop
used to assess for neuronal α-synuclein disease. Efforts to imaging tracers for topographical in vivo detection of
identify and measure pathological α-synuclein in vivo n-αsyn.51,52 Neuronal α-synuclein disease is associated
have been underway for over two decades. Several with a widespread distribution of n-αsyn aggregation
measures of n-αsyn have been investigated and show both in the peripheral nervous system and CNS.31
promising results.31,32 However, at present, only a CSF Whether pathological changes occur first in the periphery
α-synuclein seed amplification assay has undergone or concurrent to the CNS is unknown. The NSD-ISS
robust validation. The assay has been validated with framework can incorporate both peripheral and
consistent results in two different studies conducted at additional central biomarkers of n-αsyn pathology once
multiple independent laboratories using well such biomarkers are validated.
characterised samples,33,34 and showed high accuracy
when tested in a double-blind way in multiple, D anchor: dopaminergic neuron dysfunction
independent cohorts.2–4,6 Thus, this CSF α-synuclein seed The degeneration of substantia nigra dopaminergic
amplification assay meets the level of evidence required neurons (D) is a core pathological feature and the second
to reliably diagnose neuronal α-synuclein disease. This key anchor of neuronal α-synuclein disease. Evidence of
assay is positive in more than 95% of autopsy-confirmed dopaminergic neuronal dysfunction and degeneration
cases of Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy itself is not specific to neuronal α-synuclein disease but,
180 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
when combined with a biomarker of n-αsyn, is central to amyloid imaging,74 thereby enabling the incorporation of
the definition of the disease. quantitative measures of dopamine transporter binding
The loss of midbrain dopaminergic neurons was into future iterations of the NSD-ISS. Several other
identified as a key pathological marker in Parkinson’s promising imaging modalities detect dysfunction in the
disease about 75 years ago and, soon after, symptomatic dopaminergic system in vivo, such as neuromelanin-
benefit from dopamine replacement was shown.53 sensitive MRI.72,73 The NSD-ISS research framework
Extensive evidence shows that dopaminergic dysfunction enables incorporation of any emerging measures of
is present in an overwhelming majority of S+ individuals dopaminergic dysfunction in addition to or instead of
with not only predominantly motor signs or symptoms, dopamine transporter loss, once they have been rigorously
but also cognitive or other non-motor signs or symptoms replicated and validated.
of neuronal α-synuclein disease.2,54–58 Importantly, evidence suggests that n-αsyn can be
Molecular imaging of the dopamine system has been detected by seed amplification assay before dopamine
widely used to detect dopamine dysfunction. dysfunction is detectable by imaging.2,40,75 Although most
Dopaminergic imaging with fluorodopa, tracers for the individuals develop detectable dopamine transporter loss
dopamine transporter, or vesicular monoamine before functional impairment,63–67 signs or symptoms and
transporter effectively indicate striatal changes in functional impairment can occur in S+ individuals in the
dopaminergic regions, showing the asymmetric, rostral– absence of dopamine transporter deficit. Additional data
caudal striatal loss.59,60 Furthermore, dopamine transporter will clarify how frequently and under what conditions this
binding correlates with neuronal density61 and nigral cell impairment might occur. Furthermore, we acknowledge
counts62 in the brains of individuals with neurodegenerative that presynaptic dopaminergic dysfunction is not specific
disorders. Importantly, more than 88% of people with for neuronal α-synuclein disease.73
dementia with Lewy bodies diagnosed on the basis of Neuronal α-synuclein disease is a multisystem disease
clinical diagnostic criteria or on neuropathology have that might involve broad neuronal degeneration in the
abnormal measures in dopamine transporter SPECT.54–56 central, autonomic, and peripheral nervous system
Dopamine transporter loss has been shown to occur involving both dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic
before functional impairment, and individuals without pathways.76 The validation of imaging and other
functional impairment with dopamine transporter deficit biomarkers that reflect neuronal α-synuclein disease-
are likely to develop functional impairment within specific neurodegeneration will allow their incorporation
3–5 years. For example, reduced dopamine transporter into the NSD-ISS. Ultimately, we envision that a measure
binding in people with olfactory dysfunction or idiopathic of neurodegeneration beyond dopaminergic dysfunction
rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder is associated will be an anchor in the staging system.
with motor and cognitive progression.63–67 Similarly,
individuals with motor signs or symptoms without G: genetic status
dopamine transporter deficit are unlikely to have n-αsyn Genetic variants can either cause or increase risk for
and to progress to severe functional impairment.2,68,69 neuronal α-synuclein disease. Fully penetrant pathogenic
Currently, SPECT imaging using ioflupane (I¹²³) is the variants in SNCA,77 the gene that encodes α-synuclein, are
most widely used tracer to assess dopamine transporter disease-defining in the NSD-ISS. Individuals with these
binding, both in research and clinical practice. A rare variants have a high certainty of developing n-αsyn
quantitative dopamine transporter SPECT biomarker, the pathology. Other genetic variants (G) identify individuals
specific binding ratio in the lowest putamen adjusted for who might have increased age-dependent risk, but these
age and sex, is used to categorise individuals with individuals do not have neuronal α-synuclein disease
dopamine transporter deficit (D+) or without dopamine unless they show evidence of n-αsyn (S+).
transporter deficit (D–). Standardised dopamine Genetics play a pivotal part in understanding neuronal
transporter acquisition and analysis are essential. Several α-synuclein disease biology, disease subtyping, and
analysis protocols are used for dopamine transporter guiding therapeutic development. Pathogenic variants in
measurement. A goal will be to harmonise these outcomes numerous genes are associated with neuronal α-synuclein
to provide a unified standard. Data from several studies, disease.78–80 Approximately 10–15% of people with clinically
including the Parkinson Progression Markers Initiative70 diagnosed Parkinson’s disease carry pathogenic variants,
and recent clinical trials,71 are available to establish this most commonly in GBA1 and LRRK2.81 Pathogenic
quantitative standard. variants in GBA1 have also been identified in individuals
There are also limited but evolving data showing that with a clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.79
several PET tracers targeting dopamine transporters or These variants confer varied risk that is variant-dependent
vesicular monoamine transporters effectively detect and increases with age.82 Some less common genetic
dopaminergic dysfunction.60,72,73 These PET tracers might variants have high penetrance, such as biallelic pathogenic
be an alternative to ioflupane imaging. All PET and variants in VPS13C, VPS35, PARK7, PINK-1, and PRKN.78
SPECT dopamine tracer data can be harmonised to a Furthermore, over 90 single nucleotide polymorphisms
single quantitative scale, similar to the centiloid scale for have been combined into a genetic risk score that is
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 181

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
associated with increased risk of clinical Parkinson’s variants, have evidence of dopaminergic dysfunction (D+),
disease.83 Given the low or variable penetrance of many but do not have evidence of n-αsyn2–4,84–86 (S– D+ G+). In
genetic traits associated with neuronal α-synuclein the absence of n-αsyn at a given time of assessment, these
disease, and that many individuals with these variants do individuals do not have detectable neuronal α-synuclein
not develop evidence for n-αsyn, the NSD-ISS does not disease and must be defined and staged separately.
consider genotype (aside from fully penetrant pathogenic
variants in SNCA) sufficient to define the disease. Overview of the NSD-ISS
However, understanding of the genetics of neuronal Neuronal α-synuclein disease is a continuum, but discrete
α-synuclein disease is important, and we expect the stages are required to provide a research framework for
incorporation of genetics into the NSD-ISS to evolve. therapeutic development from the earliest stages, when
Most individuals with risk variants who develop pathological changes are identifiable but there are no
dopaminergic loss and functional impairment also have clinical manifestations or functional consequences, to
n-αsyn pathology and meet criteria for neuronal advanced disease. We propose an integrated staging
α-synuclein disease. However, a subset of individuals, system anchored on the disease biology (table 1). The
including some individuals with pathogenic LRRK2 biological definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease is
variants or the majority of those with pathogenic PRKN key to enable staging based on biomarkers in
Neuronal Dopamine Clinical signs and symptoms attributable to Functional impairment attributable to
α-synuclein dysfunction neuronal α-synuclein disease neuronal α-synuclein disease
biomarker (S) biomarker (D)
Genetic risk
RL (G) Genetic risk variants–low age-adjusted risk Absent Absent No clinical signs or symptoms No functional impairment
RH (G) Genetic risk variants–high age-adjusted risk Absent Absent No clinical signs or symptoms No functional impairment
Stage definition
0 Fully penetrant SNCA variant (G+) S– D– No clinical signs or symptoms No functional impairment
1A Characteristic pathological changes, but no S+ D– No clinical signs or symptoms No functional impairment
evidence of clinical signs or symptoms
1B Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ No clinical signs or symptoms No functional impairment
dopaminergic dysfunction, but no evidence of
clinical signs or symptoms
2A Characteristic pathological changes and subtle S+ D– Subtle clinical signs or symptoms that can be motor No functional impairment
detectable clinical signs and symptoms, but no or non-motor: hyposmia, RBD, cognitive
functional impairment impairment, constipation, dysautonomia,
depression, and anxiety
2B Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ Subtle clinical signs or symptoms that can be motor No functional impairment
dopaminergic dysfunction and subtle detectable or non-motor: hyposmia, RBD, cognitive
clinical signs and symptoms, but no functional impairment, constipation, dysautonomia,
impairment depression, and anxiety
3 Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ Motor and non-motor signs and symptoms defined Slight: functional impairment with
dopaminergic dysfunction and clinical signs and by a slight degree of functional impairment minimal impact on activities of daily living
symptoms causing slight functional impairment
4 Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ Motor and non-motor signs and symptoms defined Mild: functional impairment severe
dopaminergic dysfunction and clinical signs and by a mild degree of functional impairment enough to cause some impairment in
symptoms causing mild functional impairment activities of faily living, but those related
to personal care are intact, such as
bathing, dressing, walking, using the
toilet, and eating
5 Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ Motor and non-motor signs and symptoms defined Moderate: functional impairment severe
dopaminergic dysfunction and clinical signs and by a moderate degree of functional impairment enough to require assistance with
symptoms causing moderate functional activities of daily living
impairment
6 Characteristic pathological changes plus S+ D+ Motor and non-motor signs and symptoms defined Severe: functional impairment severe
dopaminergic dysfunction and clinical signs and by a severe degree of functional impairment enough to depend on others for activities
symptoms causing severe functional impairment of daily living
The classification of the categories RL and RH for neuronal α-synuclein disease is based on genetic risk factors, including known pathogenic variants, and age. The penetrance of genetic risk factors is variable across age
groups. Therefore, the RL and RH designations will be redefined even for the same variant. Furthermore, as new genetic risk factors are discovered, the criteria for the genetic risk groups will be updated. These genetic risk
categories are not part of the neuronal α-synuclein disease integrated staging system (NSD-ISS) and are listed here to facilitate identification of individuals who might be at risk for neuronal α-synuclein disease, given
the importance of genetics in the understanding of neuronal α-synuclein disease biology and future targeted therapeutics. D+=presence of neuronal dysfunction. D–=absence of neuronal dysfunction. RBD=rapid eye
movement sleep behaviour disorder. RH=high risk for neuronal α-synuclein disease. RL=low risk for neuronal α-synuclein disease. S+=presence of neuronal α-synuclein. S–=absence of neuronal α-synuclein.
Table 1: The proposed neuronal α-synuclein disease integrated staging system
182 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
Neuronal α-synuclein Neuronal α-synuclein disease
disease genetic risk
RL: presence of low-risk
genetic variants
RH: presence of high-risk
genetic variants
Stage 0: fully penetrant SNCA variant
Stages 1A and 1B: biomarkers of neuronal alpha-synuclein and dopaminergic dysfunction
Stages 2A and 2B: clinical signs and symptoms
Stages 3–6: functional impairment
Stage 3: slight Stage 4: mild Stage 5: moderate Stage 6: severe
Anchors Anchors Anchors Anchors Anchors
Genetic risk variants: Fully α-synuclein Clinical signs or Emergence and worsening of functional impairment
low (RL) versus penetrant pathology and symptoms (non
high (RH) age-adjusted genetic dopamine motor or motor)
risk variant dysfunction and but no functional
(SNCA) degeneration impairment
Figure 1: Cumulative framework of the neuronal α-synuclein disease integrated staging system
stages 1 and 2. Stages 3–6 are defined by integrating Stage 1 and beyond require detection of n-αsyn (S+).
biomarkers with clinical signs or symptoms and specific Stage 1A includes individuals with biomarker evidence of
anchors for their functional effect (figure 1). Although the n-asyn (S+), without evidence of dopaminergic
NSD-ISS stages are sequential, differences in rates of dysfunction (D–), and no relevant signs or symptoms.
progression might limit practical observation of early Given the rarity of SCNA pathogenic variants, neuronal
stages or sequential progression through subsequent α-synuclein disease will start at stage 1 for most individuals.
stages in some individuals. Stage 1B includes individuals with biomarker evidence of
Individuals with pathogenic variants associated with n-αsyn (S+) and dopaminergic dysfunction (D+), but no
neuronal α-synuclein disease risk, but who do not have relevant signs or symptoms or functional impairment. We
evidence for n-αsyn, are categorised as low or high have separated stages 1A and 1B on the basis of the
genetic risk (RL or RH respectively). These categories are hypothesis that n-αsyn pathology precedes onset of
referenced here to provide a framework within which to dopaminergic dysfunction. Limited but accumulating data
conduct research and clinical trials. However, as these support this hypothesis,2,40 but more evidence is required.
individuals do not have neuronal α-synuclein disease, Stage 2 is defined by the presence of subtle clinical
they are not assigned a stage. signs or symptoms without functional impairment.
Clinical signs or symptoms can be motor or non-motor.
Stages of the NSD-ISS Non-motor signs or symptoms include olfactory
Stage 0 is defined by the presence of fully penetrant dysfunction, dysautonomia (orthostatic hypotension or
pathogenic variants in genes established to manifest heart rate abnormalities), constipation, neuropsychiatric
with neuronal α-synuclein disease pathology. At present, symptoms (depression or anxiety), mild cognitive
fully penetrant pathogenic variants in SNCA are the only impairment, and disorders of sleep and wakefulness
known genetic cause of neuronal α-synuclein disease (rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder or
that meet this criterion and therefore included in stage 0. excessive daytime sleepiness). Some non-motor
These cases are very rare but important for understanding symptoms, such as anxiety or constipation, might be non-
neuronal α-synuclein disease biology and targeting specific, resulting from processes unrelated to n-αsyn
therapeutic development to prevent progression to, and pathology that are common in ageing. The lack of
beyond, stage 1. If other pathogenic variants that are specificity of these clinical features is mitigated by the
fully penetrant for neuronal α-synuclein disease requirement for biomarkers of n-αsyn in these
pathology are identified, they can be added to the individuals, but we recognise that there is some
definition of stage 0. Pathogenic variants in other genes uncertainty in the spectrum of the clinical features
do not define stages but are included along with advancing individuals from neuronal α-synuclein disease
S and D status in every stage. stage 1 to 2, which requires invest igation in future studies.
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 183

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
Max
Severe
Moderate
Mild
Slight
Detection threshold
None
Min
Stage 0 Stages 1A–2B Stages 3–6
Presence of fully
penetrant SNCA variant Time
Figure 2: Hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of the neuronal α-synuclein disease-integrated staging system (NSD-ISS)
Shapes and slopes of the curves and their temporal relationship are qualitative and hypothetical.
requirement for both (S+) and (D+) to advance from
stage 2A to stage 3. NSD-ISS provides a research
framework to systematically address these questions.
In stages 3–6, the severity of functional impairment
defines each progressive stage. Functional impairment can
be driven by motor, cognitive, or other non-motor clinical
signs or symptoms. Although this staging system is
grounded on the neuronal α-synuclein disease biological
framework, establishing the degree of functional
impairment using a data-driven approach is necessary for
therapeutic development and other applications of the
NSD-ISS. We have conceptualised functional impairment
qualitatively as progressing along the continuum of slight,
mild, moderate, and severe, and provide categorical
descriptors of this progression (table 1).
Most individuals with newly diagnosed Parkinson’s
disease, as defined by clinical diagnostic criteria,22 will be
stage 3, but some without functional impairment will be
stage 2B. This staging based on biology and functional
impairment is a major strength of the proposed
Similar to stage 1, stage 2 is subdivided into framework, particularly to guide selection of participants
stages 2A and 2B on the basis of the presence of for targeted drug development. Notably, those individuals
biomarkers. Therapeutics that slow or prevent individuals with a cognitive syndrome and neuronal α-synuclein
with evidence of n-αsyn pathology from developing disease-defining biology will fit in the NSD-ISS based on
dopaminergic dysfunction could be tested in individuals anchors of cognitive functional impairment.
who are progressing from stage 1 to 2. Although operational definitions of anchors for
Stage 2B and beyond require the presence of bio markers functional impairment for stages 3–6 are beyond the
of both n-αsyn (S+) and dopaminergic dys function (D+). scope of this Position Paper, they are crucial for future
Most individuals with n-αsyn will have concurrent versions of the NSD-ISS. We envision that the field will
dopaminergic dysfunction and motor, cognitive, or other soon align on these definitions as data emerge. Examples
non-motor functional impairment.57,63–67 However, of these anchors will be provided in a separate report to
additional evidence is required to determine the frequency begin a data-driven discussion to develop consensus.
to which functional impairment might occur in people Specifically, data derived from motor, non-motor, and
with n-αsyn pathology before dopaminergic dysfunction. cognitive functional rating scales assessments (ie, ability
Current data suggest that this scenario is uncommon, but to perform activities of daily living) in prospective cohort
additional data could warrant modification of the studies and clinical trials will be used to define thresholds
184 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024
serusaem
lacinilc
ro
lacigoloiB
Neuronal α-synuclein
Dopaminergic neurodegeneration
Clinical signs
Functional impairment
S anchor for D anchor Genetic
NSD (S) for NSD (D) status (G)
Dopaminergic dysfunction with motor or cognitive functional S– D+ NA
impairment with predominantly glial asyn (ie, MSA)
Dopaminergic dysfunction with motor or cognitive functional S– D+ NA
impairment without n-αsyn but with known biology (ie, PSP
or CBD)
Genetic variants with dopaminergic dysfunction but without S– D+ G+
evidence of n-αsyn
Dopaminergic dysfunction with motor or cognitive functional S– D+ G–
impairment without n-αsyn and without known genetic variant
(ie, unknown biology)
Motor or cognitive functional impairment but without n-αsyn, S– D– G–
dopaminergic dysfunction, known biology, or relevant genetic
variants
αsyn=α-synuclein. CBD=corticobasal degeneration. D+=presence of neuronal dysfunction. D–=absence of neuronal
dysfunction. G+=presence of fully penetrant SNCA variant. G–=absence of fully penetrant SNCA variant. MSA=multiple
system atrophy. n-asyn=neuronal α-synuclein. NA=not applicable. NSD=neuronal α-synuclein disease.
PSP=progressive supranuclear palsy. S+=presence of neuronal α-synuclein. S–=absence of neuronal α-synuclein.
Table 2: Biological or clinical categories that are not neuronal α-synuclein disease

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
for stages 3–6, similar to the Huntington’s disease
Panel 2: Individuals who do not have neuronal α-synuclein disease
Integrated Staging System.14 The Movement Disorders
Society-Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale S– D+ G–: multiple system atrophy
(MDS-UPDRS)87 Parts I and II are widely used to measure Neuronal α-synuclein disease does not include multiple system atrophy. Multiple system
functional impairment and can be applied as a starting atrophy is an α-synucleinopathy marked by predominantly glial α-synuclein
point. However, MDS-UPDRS has limited sensitivity to accumulation.30,92 Several lines of evidence support the notion that there are different
detect changes in function in early disease stages and new α-synuclein strains in multiple system atrophy and neuronal α-synuclein disease.41,92,93
scales and approaches need to be developed.88 For example, cryogenic electron microscopy studies have shown different conformations
of α-synuclein filaments derived from brains of individuals with multiple system
Progression of neuronal α-synuclein disease stages atrophy.18 Advances in the most widely applied CSF α-synuclein seed amplification assay
Neuronal α-synuclein disease is a continuum, and an enable the distinction between neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn) and glial-predominant
individual in a given stage is presumed to have passed α-synuclein forms associated with multiple system atrophy, based on different maximum
through all preceding stages, beginning with fluorescence emitted during amplification.41,42,44,45
stage 1A (figure 2). This presumption is supported by data
S– D+ G–: other known biologies
from prospective observational studies,2,40,63–67 although
Individuals with dopaminergic dysfunction who do not have neuronal α-synuclein disease
additional data from individuals in the earliest stages of
might have other known biologies (table 2). Examples include progressive supranuclear palsy
neuronal α-synuclein disease are still needed. For example,
an individual in stage 3 is presumed to have transitioned
and corticobasal degeneration caused by tau-related or TDP-43-related neurodegeneration.94
through stage 1 (1A, then 1B) and then stage 2. However, S– D+ G+
the transition through each of these stages might not be Individuals with genetic variants (G+), such as in LRRK2 or PRKN, with evidence of
observed, depending on the timing of assessment. The dopaminergic dysfunction (D+) and parkinsonism, but without evidence of n-αsyn (S–),
NSD-ISS framework will enable the studies required to whether assessed by CSF α-synuclein seed amplification assay or on neuropathological
investigate timing for progression from each stage to the examination2–4,84–86,95,96 do not have neuronal α-synuclein disease (table 2). Elucidating the
next and the key additional biological determinants that pathology in these individuals is a research priority. This biological heterogeneity is only
might influence the rate of progression. evident when the disease is defined by its biology, and highlights the value of a biological
Progression from stage 1 to stage 6 might not occur in rather than a clinical disease definition. Understanding the biology of S– D+ G+ will inform
all individuals with neuronal α-synuclein disease, but if it and improve clinical trial design. The neuronal α-synuclein disease-integrated staging
does occur, it might not be linear. It is probable that a system (NSD-ISS) provides the framework for determining whether a given therapeutic
substantial proportion of individuals in stage 1A—who strategy is appropriate for individuals with neurodegeneration or at risk of it, determined
are S+ but are asymptomatic—will not develop signs or on the basis of knowledge of the mechanism of action and inclusion of biomarker-defined
symptoms and, therefore, might remain in stage 1A for groups in study cohorts. For example, LRRK2-positive, S– participants might be included
life. As with other neurod egenerative diseases, including in LRRK2-targeted therapeutic studies independent of their S status,97 but would not be
Alzheimer’s disease12,13 and Huntington’s disease,14 a candidates for n-αsyn-targeting therapeutic studies.
biological definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease
enables detection of asymptomatic disease, which is S– D+ G– with unknown biology
crucial for the developm ent and testing of therapies that Among individuals with clinically diagnosed sporadic Parkinson’s disease and with
might prevent the progression of neuronal α-synuclein evidence of dopaminergic dysfunction, about 7% do not have n-αsyn, relevant genetic
disease biology before any clinically meaningful variants, or alternative known biology2 (S– D+ G–; table 2). Although the CSF α-synuclein
consequences arise. We recognise that there might be seed amplification assay as well as neuropathological studies98 indicate that these
important psychosocial and economic consequences to individuals are truly n-αsyn negative, additional studies in larger population-based
such early identification of neurodegenerative diseases cohorts are needed to confirm this status. These individuals do not meet the biological
that require further study. The NSD-ISS research definition for neuronal α-synuclein disease. Further studies will elucidate the relevant
framework will enable systematic evaluation to improve biologies underling the neurodegenerative process in these individuals. Importantly,
the process of informing research participants of their these individuals should not be enrolled into α-synuclein-targeting therapeutic trials,
results. highlighting the importance of an accurate biological definition.
Neuronal α-synuclein disease-associated clinical sleep disorder (ie, rapid eye movement-sleep behaviour
syndromes disorder), and other non-motor syndromes (ie, autonomic
The core principle of the NSD-ISS is that neuronal or hyposmia; appendix p 2). In most cases these syndromes
α-synuclein disease is defined by biology. Yet, a disease will overlap, and contributions from motor and non-motor
based on a single biology might have protean clinical features will produce a cumulative effect on functional
manifestations. Individuals with neuronal α-synuclein impairment. Clinical presentations arising from neuronal
disease might have a range of clinical syndromes, α-synuclein disease include n-αsyn-driven motor
including a motor syndrome (ie, Parkinson’s syndrome parkinsonism and cognitive impairment—currently
based on a biological definition), cognitive syndromes diagnosed as Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease
(ie, dementia with Lewy bodies or Parkinson’s dementia), dementia, or dementia with Lewy bodies based on clinical
neuropsychiatric syndromes (ie, anxiety or depression), a diagnostic criteria.22–24 Other well described syndromes
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 185

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
include rapid eye movement-sleep behaviour disorder89
Panel 3: Outstanding research questions
and dysautonomia, including pure autonomic failure;90
• Although the CSF α-synuclein seed amplification assay is a validated biomarker of neuropsychiatric symptoms might predominate as well.19,21
neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn), it requires CSF collection, and the assay is currently Although the NSD-ISS provides a unifying biological
available in a small number of qualified laboratories. Thus, more feasible and scalable definition and staging, recognition of clinical syndromes
measures for n-αsyn are required. is important to guide symptomatic management, family
• Additional data on n-αsyn are needed in diverse cohorts representative of the general support, and education.
population, in a greater number of disease populations, including larger cohorts of Another important implication of the biologically based
research participants with a clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies, and in framework of the NSD-ISS is that a clinical diagnosis of
the real-world setting. This data acquisition will be enabled by scalable and feasible prodromal Parkinson’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
n-αsyn assessment. Parkinson’s disease dementia, or dementia with Lewy
• The S (presence of neuronal α-synuclein) and D (presence of dopaminergic bodies is neither sufficient nor necessary for a neuronal
dysfunction) domains are currently categorical. There is a crucial need for quantitative α-synuclein disease diagnosis. The NSD-ISS unifies what
biomarkers to measure disease onset, progression, and response to therapy. is currently defined as prodromal Parkinson’s disease and
• Development of biomarkers that are minimally invasive and cost-effective will dementia with Lewy bodies19–21 and related disorders along
facilitate inclusive and representative population screening. the same continuum of progression of the neuronal
• The timeline of progression along the axis of biological staging is unknown. The α-synuclein disease neurodegenerative process (figure 1).
prevalence of n-αsyn in asymptomatic older adults is age-dependent and is estimated The current distinction of prodromal versus clinically
at 5–12%.2,6,27,39,99 These individuals have neuronal α-synuclein disease. Studies are diagnosed Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy
needed to better understand the epidemiology of these stage 1A individuals, bodies is arbitrary, lacks standardised criteria for transition,
including the incidence of and rate of progression to D+, and incident functional and creates barriers in therapeutic development.
impairment. Such data will be essential to enable therapeutic development for Terminology such as phenoconversion lacks operational
prevention of disability. definition and is faulted by subjectivity. Enrolling
• Understanding the biology of research participants with clinically diagnosed individuals with neuronal α-synuclein disease in
Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy bodies who do not have neuronal stages 1 and 2 (previously termed prodromal cohorts) into
α-synuclein disease (S– D+ G+ individuals and S– D+ G– individuals) is a high priority. trials testing experimental therapeutics targeting specific
• As reliable biomarkers emerge that reflect molecular changes of underlying molecular pathways is of high interest.7,8 Success of these
neurodegeneration (ie, mitochondrial, lysosomal, inflammatory, and other clinical trials depends on identifying participants with a
pathways30) that are neuronal α-synuclein disease-specific, additional biological unifying underlying disease biology and establishing the
anchors will be introduced to refine the staging system. framework for defining progression. A biological definition
• Neuronal α-synuclein disease is a multisystem disease that involves and integrated staging system aims to accomplish both
neurodegeneration in other neurotransmitter systems besides dopamine.76 goals.
With validation of biomarkers that reflect pathology in these systems will come the
Incorporating other pathologies into the
opportunities to incorporate them.
NSD-ISS framework
• Defining specific functional anchors across stages 3–6 was outside of the scope of this
Position Paper and is underway. Several observational cohort studies, including the Many individuals have mixed pathology and comorbid
Parkinson Progression Markers Initiative,70 the Dementia with Lewy Bodies diseases in addition to neuronal α-synuclein disease. A
Consortium,100 and clinical trials71 offer crucial data that will allow validation of key challenge for the NSD-ISS will be to assess the
functional anchors. relative effect of clinical signs or symptoms, particularly
• Current understanding of the clinical features of neuronal α-synuclein disease, cognitive function, on functional impairment in
especially in its earliest stages, is largely based on findings from prospective cohort individuals with multiple underlying pathophysiological
studies of clinically diagnosed individuals recruited according to genetic risk or processes and variable clinical syndromes. The NSD-ISS
presence of non-motor features.19,20 With the biological definition of neuronal enables the investigation of the biological mechanisms
α-synuclein disease comes the opportunity to study biomarker-defined cohorts and resulting in functional impairment and the incorporation
observe the evolution of non-motor and motor features to establish the specificity for of biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease and other
underlying biology. As additional data emerge, stage 2 of the neuronal α-synuclein conditions into the neuronal α-synuclein disease staging.
disease-integrated staging system might be modified to incorporate the relative
Individuals who do not have neuronal
weights of different clinical features according to their specificity for an underlying
α-synuclein disease
cause.
• A key challenge for the neuronal α-synuclein disease-integrated staging system will be Based on extensive data from multiple cohorts,2–4,6 the
the assessment of the degree of contribution of multiple co-pathologies on functional biological definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease
impairment (particularly cognitive impairment). Acquiring Alzheimer’s disease and applies to the majority (>90%) of individuals diagnosed
other neurodegenerative biomarkers might become a routine component of neuronal with Parkinson’s disease or dementia with Lewy bodies
α-synuclein disease staging. as per current clinical diagnostic criteria. By defining the
disease based on biology, and specifically by the presence
of n-αsyn, application of the NSD-ISS might result in the
identification of individuals with parkinsonism and
186 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
evidence of dopaminergic dysfunction (D+)2 who are therapies for individuals in late stages of the disease.
n-αsyn negative (S–). These individuals do not have Importantly, it also ensures that individuals who do not
neuronal α-synuclein disease, regardless of their clinical have n-αsyn pathology are not enrolled into n-αsyn-
syndrome, even in the presence of evidence of targeting therapeutic trials.
dopaminergic dysfunction or pathogenic genetic An advantage of the NSD-ISS will be to reduce
variants, and staging by NSD-ISS does not apply to them heterogeneity in clinical trials by requiring biological
(table 2). Although determining the cause of consistency within the study cohort, rather than
parkinsonism in such individuals is critical, it is beyond identifying study participants on the basis of clinical
the scope of this Position Paper; S– status does not criteria for Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy
inform alternative diagnoses but highlights specific bodies, which introduces heterogeneity. Moreover, the
examples of relevance to therapeutic development and NSD-ISS provides a framework for designing studies to
the need for further research (panel 2) answer several crucial outstanding questions related to
the epidemiology of neuronal α-synuclein disease,
Conclusions and future directions including the prevalence of asymptomatic n-αsyn in the
Although evidence strongly support the biological general population (ie, prevalence of stage 1), incidence
definition for neuronal α-synuclein disease and the of n-αsyn positivity in different populations, and
NSD-ISS, we recognise that there are knowledge gaps temporal progression across stages, including from S+
and that our understanding of neuronal α-synuclein D– to S+ D+.
disease biology and staging will evolve. These gaps, in The NSD-ISS will enhance trial design, provide a
turn, define key research priorities for the field. consistent definition for the study cohort at each stage,
Importantly, the NSD-ISS provides a framework within and enable selection of trial endpoints. The NSD-ISS will
which to answer key outstanding research questions, evolve as new data and biomarkers emerge. Presently,
which will inform future iterations of the staging system the NSD-ISS is intended for research use only; its
(panel 3). application in the clinical setting is premature and
This first iteration of the NSD-ISS is intended to inappropriate.
provide a research framework to accelerate therapeutic
Contributors
develop ment, similar to the evolution of disease TSi, LMC, KP, SC, LC-M, TD, TB, MC, CC, PD, TF, MF, DJ, KK, CMK,
definition and staging of Alzheimer’s disease.12,13 At KMe, BM, TM, KN, GP, JS, TSh, ASin, DS, MS, CS, CMT, ET, DW, YX,
ASid, BD, and KMa contributed to the conceptualisation. TSi, LC, MB,
present, application of the NSD-ISS in the clinical setting
CC, CG, ASid, BD, and KMa contributed to the data curation and formal
is premature, and it is inappropriate to use the NSD-ISS
analysis. TSi, LMC, MB, CC, ASid, BD, and KMa contributed to the
clinically before sufficient data are available to enable validation. TSi, LMC, KP, LC-M, TD, PD, TF, CG, DJ, KK, KMe, BM,
understanding of stage-dependent disease progression. TM, KN, GP, JS, ASin, DS, MS, CS, CMT, ET, DW, ASid, BD, and KMa
contributed to the supervision. TSi, LMC, ASid, BD, and KMa
The goal is eventually achieving a clinically useful staging
contributed to the writing of the original Position Paper. SC, MF, CK,
system to aid in early, accurate diagnosis, and to guide TSh and YX acquired funding, provided resources, and contributed to
treatment. the project administration. All authors contributed to the investigations,
During the process of development of the NSD-ISS methods, and the review and editing of the final version of the Position
Paper. TSi and LMC have had direct access to and verified all
(appendix p 1), there was broad consensus from key
components of the submitted Position Paper.
stakeholders15 that its adoption would improve
Declaration of interests
therapeutic development at all disease stages, from
TSi declares consultancies for 4D Pharma, Acadia, AcureX, AskBio,
before onset of signs or symptoms through mild to Amneal, Blue Rock Therapeutics, Caraway, Critical Path for Parkinson’s
severe functional impairment. Identifying individuals on Consortium, Denali, The Michael J Fox Foundation, Neuroderm, Roche,
the basis of biological characteristics enables a new Sanofi, Sinopia, Sunovion, Takeda, UCB, Vanqua Bio, and Voyager.
LMC declares research support and consulting fees from The
approach to developing therapies targeting relevant
Michael J Fox Foundation. KP declares consultancies for Curasen; was
biology that will pave the way for precision medicine in on a scientific advisory board for Curasen and Amprion; honoraria from
the treatment of neuronal α-synuclein disease.8,91 invited scientific presentations to universities and professional societies
The NSD-ISS, with a consistent and uniformly under- not exceeding $5000 per year from California Congress of Clinical
Neurology, California Neurological Society, and Johns Hopkins
stood definition of the study cohort at each stage,
University; and patents or patent applications numbers 17/314,979 and
provides a framework for clinical trial design and 63/377,293. KP also declares grants to her institution (Stanford
evaluation by key constituencies, including University School of Medicine) from NIH/NINDS NS115114, NS062684,
pharmaceutical drug developers, regulators, academic NS075097, NIH/NIA U19 AG065156, P30 AG066515, The Michael J Fox
Foundation, Lewy Body Dementia Association, Alzheimer’s Drug
experts, and clinical trial participants. It also enables
Discovery Foundation, Sue Berghoff LBD Research Fellowship, and the
development of stage-dependent outcomes to allow Knight Initiative for Brain Resilience. MB declares travel grants from
assessment within a stage and to define changes between The Michael J Fox Foundation. SC declares employment for and travel
stages91 (eg, outcomes could reflect change from stage 2B grants from The Michael J Fox Foundation. The Michael J Fox
Foundation received funding support from named non-profit
to stage 3 or from stage 1 to stage 2). In turn, the
institutions (Cure Parkinson’s, Lewy Body Dementia Association,
availability of stage-appropriate endpoints can facilitate Parkinson Canada, Parkinson’s UK, and Shake It Up Australia
therapeutic development, including symptomatic Foundation) to convene an in-person roundtable of experts in April 2023
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 187

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
in which The Michael J Fox Foundation (employer) cost-shared; The and Massachusetts General Hospital. BD has received consulting fees
Michael J Fox Foundation (employer) provided funding for an in-person and travel support for his role as an advisor for Arch Venture Partners,
meeting in January, 2023. CC declares grants from The Michael J Fox Cerveau Technologies, Epilepsy Foundation, F-PRIME Capital, Loulou
Foundation and NIH/NINDS. LC-M declares employment for, and Foundation, and The Michael J Fox Foundation. BD has a leadership or
employee stock options in, Amprion; grants from The Michael J Fox fiduciary role in the Virginia Neurological Society (past president) and
Foundation; and patents or patent applications (numbers US Prothena (Director). BD holds stock options with Prothena. KM declares
20210277076A1, US 20210311077A1, US 20190353669A1, and US support to his institution (Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders)
20210223268A1). TD declares former employment of and might hold from The Michael J Fox Foundation. KMa also declares consultancies for
stock or stock options in Biogen. TF declares travel grants and grant Invicro, The Michael J Fox Foundation, Roche, Calico, Coave, Neuron23,
payments to her institution (Indiana University) from The Michael J Fox Orbimed, Biohaven, Anofi, Koneksa, Merck, Lilly, Inhibikase,
Foundation. MF declares employment for The Michael J Fox Foundation Neuramedy, IRLabs, and Prothena. KMa participates on DSMB at
and an unpaid advisory role at Vaxxinity. CG declares research funding Biohaven. TB, MC, PD, and ET and declare no competing interests.
to her institution from The Michael J Fox Foundation. DJ declares
Acknowledgments
employment for and employee stock options from Denali Therapeutics.
This article reflects the views of the authors and should not be construed
KK declares support to his institution (University of Rochester Medical
to represent the US Food and Drug Administration views or policies.
Center) from The Michael J Fox Foundation. CK declares employment
We appreciate Werner Poewe’s substantial contribution to the conceptual
for and travel grants from The Michael J Fox Foundation. KMe declares
design and critical review of the final draft of the Position Paper. We are
consultancies for The Michael J Fox Foundation, AcuRx, Caraway,
grateful to research advocates Alison Handler, Soania Mathur, and
Cerebral Therapeutics, NRG Therapeutics (scientific advisory board),
Carroll Siu who contributed their perspectives as individuals affected by
Nitrase Therapeutics (scientific advisory board), Nurabio, Retromer
Parkinson’s disease. We thank representatives from non-profit funders
Therapeutics (director on the board, part-time chief scientific officer),
and patient advocates for their strategic support in convening diverse
Schrodinger, Sinopia Biosciences (scientific advisory board), and Vanqua
stakeholders and experts to provide input through key meetings and
Biosciences (scientific advisory board); stock ownership for Cognition
public comment including Angelica Asis, Clyde Campbell, David Dexter,
Therapeutics, Eli Lilly (retiree stock holder), Envisagenics, Nitrase
Keith N Fargo, Karen Lee, Helen Matthews, Anna Naito, Angela Taylor,
Therapeutics, Sinopia Biosciences, and Retromer Therapeutics;
and multiple collaborators at the Critical Path Institute. Funding support
honoraria for the University of Utah; patents or patent applications for
for the January 2023 conference was provided by The Michael J Fox
Retromer Therapeutics (planned patent); a research grant from The
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. Funding support for the
Michael J Fox Foundation; and travel grants from the University of Utah.
subsequent April 2023 in-person roundtable and virtual summit was
BM declares consultancies from Roche, Biogen, and The Michael J Fox
provided by Cure Parkinson’s, Lewy Body Dementia Association,
Foundation; grants from The Michael J Fox Foundation, ASAP, and
The Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Parkinson
DFG; honoraria for AbbVie; and travel grants for AbbVie. TM declares
Canada, Parkinson’s UK, and Shake It Up Foundation Australia.
support to his institution (Stanford University School of Medicine) from
Research officers (SC, MF, CMK, TS, and YX) at The Michael J Fox
The Michael J Fox Foundation. KN declares support from The
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research were involved in the design of
Michael J Fox Foundation. GP declares employment for F Hoffmann-La
NSD-ISS and writing of the Position Paper. Representatives from other
Roche and stock ownership for F Hoffmann-La Roche, Atea, Novartis,
funding partners contributed critical review and commentary on
and Eli Lilly. JS declares consultancies from Invicro, Biogen, and AbbVie;
concepts and evolution of overarching themes within the NSD-ISS as
and stock ownership from RealmIDX, MNI Holdings, and LikeMinds,
well as on the pre-publication Position Paper. While this report presents a
as well as grants from The Michael J Fox Foundation. TSh declares
conceptual framework for NSD-ISS, the data that has enabled these
employment for The Michael J Fox Foundation. ASin declares
concepts has largely emerged from the PPMI study. We acknowledge that
employment for NIH who received grants from The Michael J Fox
PPMI is scientifically supported and largely funded by The Michael J Fox
Foundation and ASAP. ASin declares Diagnostic for Stroke royalties
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research and Aligning Science Across
(unrelated to current work); honoraria from Movement Disorders
Parkinson’s and the PPMI Partners Scientific Advisory Board
Society and Nature Publishing Group; travel grants from Chan
(https://www.ppmi-info.org/about-ppmi/who-we-are/study-sponsors).
Zuckerberg Initiative, The Michael J Fox Foundation, and Weill Cornell.
Asin’s spouse is an employee of GeneDx. DS has no declarations. References
MS declared consultancies for Mediflix, and Health and Wellness 1 Fairfoul G, McGuire LI, Pal S, et al. Alpha-synuclein RT-QuIC in
Partners; honoraria from Atria Foundation, International Parkinson the CSF of patients with alpha-synucleinopathies.
and Movement Disorder Society, Neurocrine, Luye Pharma, and Acorda. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2016; 3: 812–18.
MS serves on advisory board at Neuroderm, Alexza, Alexion, and 2 Siderowf A, Concha-Marambio L, Lafontant D-E, et al. Assessment
Biogen. CS declares employment for Amprion; stock ownership for of heterogeneity among participants in the Parkinson’s Progression
Markers Initiative cohort using the α-synuclein seed amplification
Amprion; honoraria (will receive royalties for the sale of seed
assay: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Neurol 2023; 22: 407–17.
amplification assay) from Amprion; and patents or patent applications,
3 Bellomo G, De Luca CMG, Paoletti FP, Gaetani L, Moda F,
awarded and amplified in conjunction with Amprion for the seed
Parnetti L. α-synuclein seed amplification assays for diagnosing
amplification assay. CT declares consultancies for CNS Ratings,
synucleinopathies: the way forward. Neurology 2022; 99: 195–205.
Australian Parkinson’s Mission, Biogen, Evidera, Cadent (data safety
4 Brockmann K, Quadalti C, Lerche S, et al. Association between
monitoring board), Adamas (steering committee), Biogen (via the
CSF alpha-synuclein seeding activity and genetic status in
Parkinson Study Group steering committee), Kyowa Kirin (advisory
Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
board), Lundbeck (advisory board), Jazz–Cavion (steering committee), Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021; 9: 175.
Acorda (advisory board), Bial (DMC), and Genentech. CT also declares 5 Rossi M, Candelise N, Baiardi S, et al. Ultrasensitive RT-QuIC assay
grant support to UCSF from The Michael J Fox Foundation, National with high sensitivity and specificity for Lewy body-associated
Institute of Health, Gateway, Department of Defense, Roche Genentech, synucleinopathies. Acta Neuropathol 2020; 140: 49–62.
Biogen, Parkinson Foundation, and Marcus Program in Precision 6 Grossauer A, Hemicker G, Krismer F, et al. α-synuclein seed
Medicine. DW declares salary support from The Michael J Fox amplification assays in the diagnosis of synucleinopathies using
Foundation for serving on an executive steering committee for the cerebrospinal fluid-a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Parkinson Progression Markers Initiative. YX declares employment for Mov Disord Clin Pract 2023; 10: 737–47.
and travel grants from The Michael J Fox Foundation. ASid declares 7 Sardi SP, Cedarbaum JM, Brundin P. Targeted therapies for
consultancies for SPARC Therapeutics, Capsida Therapeutics, Parkinson’s disease: from genetics to the clinic. Mov Disord 2018;
and Parkinson Study Group; honoraria from Bial; grants from The 33: 684–96.
Michael J Fox Foundation (member of Parkinson Progression Markers 8 Berg D, Crotty GF, Keavney JL, Schwarzschild MA, Simuni T,
Initiative steering committee), and NIH; and participation on board at Tanner C. Path to Parkinson disease prevention: conclusion and
Wave Life Sciences, Inhibikase, Prevail and Huntington Study Group, outlook. Neurology 2022; 99: 76–83.
188 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
9 Mestre TA, Fereshtehnejad SM, Berg D, et al. Parkinson’s disease 33 Russo MJ, Orru CD, Concha-Marambio L, et al. High diagnostic
subtypes: critical appraisal and recommendations. J Parkinsons Dis performance of independent alpha-synuclein seed amplification
2021; 11: 395–404. assays for detection of early Parkinson’s disease.
10 Parkinson J. An essay on the shaking palsy. 1817. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021; 9: 179.
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2002; 14: 223–36. 34 Kang UJ, Boehme AK, Fairfoul G, et al. Comparative study of
11 McKeith IG, Galasko D, Kosaka K, et al. Consensus guidelines for cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein seeding aggregation assays for
the clinical and pathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2019; 34: 536–44.
(DLB): report of the consortium on DLB international workshop. 35 Bargar C, Wang W, Gunzler SA, et al. Streamlined alpha-synuclein
Neurology 1996; 47: 1113–24. RT-QuIC assay for various biospecimens in Parkinson’s disease and
12 Jack CR Jr, Bennett DA, Blennow K, et al. NIA-AA research dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021; 9: 62.
framework: toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. 36 Singer W, Schmeichel AM, Shahnawaz M, et al. Alpha-synuclein
Alzheimers Dement 2018; 14: 535–62. oligomers and neurofilament light chain predict phenoconversion
13 Alzheimer’s Association. Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of of pure autonomic failure. Ann Neurol 2021; 89: 1212–20.
Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup. https:// 37 Concha-Marambio L, Farris CM, Holguin B, et al. Seed
alz.org/media/Documents/scientific-conferences/Clinical-Criteria- amplification assay to diagnose early Parkinson’s and predict
for-Staging-and-Diagnosis-for-Public-Comment-Draft-2.pdf?_ dopaminergic deficit progression. Mov Disord 2021; 36: 2444–46.
gl=1*iet1ne*_ga*MTkxMTMwMzAwMC4xNjkzOTI5OTc0*_ga_QSF 38 Iranzo A, Fairfoul G, Ayudhaya ACN, et al. Detection of α-synuclein
TKCEH7C*MTcwMDI2MzI2MS4yLjAuMTcwMDI2MzI3MC41MS4w in CSF by RT-QuIC in patients with isolated rapid-eye-movement
LjA.*_ga_9JTEWVX24V*MTcwMDI2MzI2MS4yLjAuMTcwMDI2Mz sleep behaviour disorder: a longitudinal observational study.
I3MC41MS4wLjA. (accessed Nov 18, 2023). Lancet Neurol 2021; 20: 203–12.
14 Tabrizi SJ, Schobel S, Gantman EC, et al. A biological classification of 39 Palmqvist S, Rossi M, Hall S, et al. Cognitive effects of Lewy body
Huntington’s disease: the integrated staging system. Lancet Neurol pathology in clinically unimpaired individuals. Nat Med 2023;
2022; 21: 632–44. 29: 1971–78.
15 O’Hanlon CE, Farmer CM, Ryan J, Ernecoff N. Clinical outcome 40 Marek KRD, Concha L; Choi C, et al. Widespread synuclein
assessments and digital health technologies supporting clinical trial pathology in hyposmics precedes dopamine transporter deficit in
endpoints in early Parkinson’s disease: roundtable proceedings and PARS. Movement Disorders 2023; 38 (suppl 1): S63–S139 (abstr #253).
roadmap for research. https://doi.org/10.7249/CFA2550-1 (accessed 41 Shahnawaz M, Mukherjee A, Pritzkow S, et al. Discriminating
Nov 18, 2023). α-synuclein strains in Parkinson’s disease and multiple system
16 Guerrero-Ferreira R, Taylor NM, Mona D, et al. Cryo-EM structure of atrophy. Nature 2020; 578: 273–77.
alpha-synuclein fibrils. eLife 2018; 7: e36402. 42 Singer W, Schmeichel AM, Shahnawaz M, et al. Alpha-synuclein
17 Guerrero-Ferreira R, Kovacik L, Ni D, Stahlberg H. New insights on oligomers and neurofilament light chain in spinal fluid differentiate
the structure of alpha-synuclein fibrils using cryo-electron multiple system atrophy from Lewy body synucleinopathies.
microscopy. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2020; 61: 89–95. Ann Neurol 2020; 88: 503–12.
18 Yang Y, Shi Y, Schweighauser M, et al. Structures of α-synuclein 43 Mollenhauer B, Batrla R, El-Agnaf O, et al. A user’s guide for
filaments from human brains with Lewy pathology. Nature 2022; α-synuclein biomarker studies in biological fluids: perianalytical
610: 791–95. considerations. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 1117–30.
19 Berg D, Postuma RB, Adler CH, et al. MDS research criteria for 44 Concha-Marambio L, Pritzkow S, Shahnawaz M, Farris CM, Soto C.
prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2015; 30: 1600–11. Seed amplification assay for the detection of pathologic alpha-
20 Heinzel S, Berg D, Gasser T, Chen H, Yao C, Postuma RB. Update of synuclein aggregates in cerebrospinal fluid. Nat Protoc 2023;
the MDS research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease. 18: 1179–96.
Mov Disord 2019; 34: 1464–70. 45 Okuzumi A, Hatano T, Matsumoto G, et al. Propagative α-synuclein
21 McKeith IG, Ferman TJ, Thomas AJ, et al. Research criteria for the seeds as serum biomarkers for synucleinopathies. Nat Med 2023;
diagnosis of prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology 2020; 29: 1448–55.
94: 743–55. 46 Gibbons C, Wang N, Rajan S, et al. Cutaneous α-synuclein
22 Postuma RB, Berg D, Stern M, et al. MDS clinical diagnostic criteria signatures in patients with multiple system atrophy and Parkinson
for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2015; 30: 1591–601. disease. Neurology 2023; 100: e1529–39.
23 McKeith IG, Boeve BF, Dickson DW, et al. Diagnosis and 47 Kluge A, Bunk J, Schaeffer E, et al. Detection of neuron-derived
management of dementia with Lewy bodies: fourth consensus report pathological α-synuclein in blood. Brain 2022; 145: 3058–71.
of the DLB consortium. Neurology 2017; 89: 88–100. 48 Doppler K. Detection of dermal alpha-synuclein deposits as a
24 Emre M, Aarsland D, Brown R, et al. Clinical diagnostic criteria for biomarker for Parkinson’s disease. J Parkinsons Dis 2021; 11: 937–47.
dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2007; 49 Donadio V, Wang Z, Incensi A, et al. In vivo diagnosis of
22: 1689–707. synucleinopathies: a comparative study of skin biopsy and
25 Siderowf A, Stern MB. Preclinical diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: RT-QuIC. Neurology 2021; 96: e2513–24.
are we there yet? Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2006; 6: 295–301. 50 Donadio V, Incensi A, Rizzo G, et al. Phosphorylated α-synuclein in
26 Ross GW, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Tanner CM, White LR. skin Schwann cells: a new biomarker for multiple system atrophy.
Pre-motor features of Parkinson’s disease: the Honolulu-Asia aging Brain 2023; 146: 1065–74.
study experience. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012; 18: S199–202. 51 Alzghool OM, van Dongen G, van de Giessen E, Schoonmade L,
27 Koeglsperger T, Rumpf SL, Schließer P, et al. Neuropathology of Beaino W. α-synuclein radiotracer development and in vivo
incidental Lewy body & prodromal Parkinson’s disease. imaging: recent advancements and new perspectives. Mov Disord
Mol Neurodegener 2023; 18: 32. 2022; 37: 936–48.
28 Goedert M, Spillantini MG, Del Tredici K, Braak H. 100 years of Lewy 52 Xiang J, Tao Y, Xia Y, et al. Development of an α-synuclein positron
pathology. Nat Rev Neurol 2013; 9: 13–24. emission tomography tracer for imaging synucleinopathies.
29 Spillantini MG, Schmidt ML, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Jakes R, Cell 2023; 186: 3350–67.
Goedert M. Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 1997; 388: 839–40. 53 Lees AJ, Tolosa E, Olanow CW. Four pioneers of L-dopa treatment:
30 Calabresi P, Mechelli A, Natale G, Volpicelli-Daley L, Di Lazzaro G, Arvid Carlsson, Oleh Hornykiewicz, George Cotzias, and Melvin
Ghiglieri V. Alpha-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease and other Yahr. Mov Disord 2015; 30: 19–36.
synucleinopathies: from overt neurodegeneration back to early 54 Walker Z, Jaros E, Walker RW, et al. Dementia with Lewy bodies:
synaptic dysfunction. Cell Death Dis 2023; 14: 176. a comparison of clinical diagnosis, FP-CIT single photon emission
31 Magalhães P, Lashuel HA. Opportunities and challenges of computed tomography imaging and autopsy.
alpha-synuclein as a potential biomarker for Parkinson’s disease and J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2007; 78: 1176–81.
other synucleinopathies. NPJ Parkinsons Dis 2022; 8: 93. 55 McKeith I, O’Brien J, Walker Z, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of
32 Höglinger GU, Adler CH, Berg D, et al. Towards a biological dopamine transporter imaging with 123I-FP-CIT SPECT in
definition of Parkinson’s Disease. Preprints 2023; published online dementia with Lewy bodies: a phase III, multicentre study.
April 7. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202304.0108.v1 (preprints). Lancet Neurol 2007; 6: 305–13.
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024 189

---PAGE BREAK---

Position Paper
56 McCleery J, Morgan S, Bradley KM, Noel-Storr AH, Ansorge O, 78 Jia F, Fellner A, Kumar KR. Monogenic Parkinson’s disease:
Hyde C. Dopamine transporter imaging for the diagnosis of genotype, phenotype, pathophysiology, and genetic testing. Genes
dementia with Lewy bodies. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 2022; 13: 471.
1: CD010633. 79 Orme T, Guerreiro R, Bras J. The genetics of dementia with Lewy
57 Thomas AJ, Attems J, Colloby SJ, et al. Autopsy validation of bodies: current understanding and future directions.
123I-FP-CIT dopaminergic neuroimaging for the diagnosis of DLB. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2018; 18: 67.
Neurology 2017; 88: 276–83. 80 Bandres-Ciga S, Diez-Fairen M, Kim JJ, Singleton AB. Genetics of
58 Papathanasiou ND, Boutsiadis A, Dickson J, Bomanji JB. Parkinson’s disease: an introspection of its journey towards
Diagnostic accuracy of ¹²³I-FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) in dementia with precision medicine. Neurobiol Dis 2020; 137: 104782.
Lewy bodies: a meta-analysis of published studies. 81 Skrahina V, Gaber H, Vollstedt EJ, et al. The rostock international
Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012; 18: 225–29. Parkinson’s disease (ROPAD) study: protocol and initial findings.
59 Haber SN, Fudge JL, McFarland NR. Striatonigrostriatal pathways Mov Disord 2021; 36: 1005–10.
in primates form an ascending spiral from the shell to the 82 Lee AJ, Wang Y, Alcalay RN, et al. Penetrance estimate of LRRK2
dorsolateral striatum. J Neurosci 2000; 20: 2369–82. p.G2019S mutation in individuals of non-Ashkenazi Jewish
60 Seibyl JP, Kuo P. What is the role of dopamine transporter imaging ancestry. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 1432–38.
in Parkinson prevention clinical trials? Neurology 2022; 83 Koch S, Laabs B-H, Kasten M, et al. Validity and prognostic value of
99 (suppl 1): 61–67. a polygenic risk score for Parkinson’s disease. Genes 2021; 12: 1859.
61 Colloby SJ, McParland S, O’Brien JT, Attems J. Neuropathological 84 Schneider SA, Alcalay RN. Neuropathology of genetic
correlates of dopaminergic imaging in Alzheimer’s disease and synucleinopathies with parkinsonism: review of the literature.
Lewy body dementias. Brain 2012; 135: 2798–808. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 1504–23.
62 Kraemmer J, Kovacs GG, Perju-Dumbrava L, Pirker S, 85 Doherty KM, Silveira-Moriyama L, Parkkinen L, et al. Parkin
Traub-Weidinger T, Pirker W. Correlation of striatal dopamine disease: a clinicopathologic entity? JAMA Neurol 2013; 70: 571–79.
transporter imaging with post mortem substantia nigra cell counts. 86 Poulopoulos M, Levy OA, Alcalay RN. The neuropathology of
Mov Disord 2014; 29: 1767–73. genetic Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2012; 27: 831–42.
63 Postuma RB, Iranzo A, Hu M, et al. Risk and predictors of 87 Goetz CG, Tilley BC, Shaftman SR, et al. Movement disorder
dementia and parkinsonism in idiopathic REM sleep behaviour society-sponsored revision of the unified Parkinson’s disease rating
disorder: a multicentre study. Brain 2019; 142: 744–59. scale (MDS-UPDRS): scale presentation and clinimetric testing
64 Wang C, Chen F, Li Y, Liu J. Possible predictors of phenoconversion results. Mov Disord 2008; 23: 2129–70.
in isolated REM sleep behaviour disorder: a systematic review and 88 Regnault A, Boroojerdi B, Meunier J, Bani M, Morel T, Cano S.
meta-analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2022; 93: 395–403. Does the MDS-UPDRS provide the precision to assess progression
65 Chahine LM, Brumm MC, Caspell-Garcia C, et al. Dopamine in early Parkinson’s disease? Learnings from the Parkinson’s
transporter imaging predicts clinically-defined α-synucleinopathy in progression marker initiative cohort. J Neurol 2019; 266: 1927–36.
REM sleep behavior disorder. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2021; 89 Boeve BF, Silber MH, Ferman TJ, et al. Clinicopathologic
8: 201–12. correlations in 172 cases of rapid eye movement sleep behavior
66 Siderowf A, Jennings D, Stern M, et al. Clinical and imaging disorder with or without a coexisting neurologic disorder. Sleep Med
progression in the PARS cohort: long-term follow-up. Mov Disord 2013; 14: 754–62.
2020; 35: 1550–57. 90 Goldstein DS, Isonaka R, Lamotte G, Kaufmann H. Different
67 Jennings D, Siderowf A, Stern M, et al. Conversion to Parkinson phenoconversion pathways in pure autonomic failure with versus
disease in the PARS hyposmic and dopamine transporter-deficit without Lewy bodies. Clin Auton Res 2021; 31: 677–84.
prodromal cohort. JAMA Neurol 2017; 74: 933–40. 91 Stephenson D, Belfiore-Oshan R, Karten Y, et al. Transforming drug
68 Marek K, Seibyl J, Eberly S, et al. Longitudinal follow-up of SWEDD development for neurological disorders: proceedings from a
subjects in the PRECEPT study. Neurology 2014; 82: 1791–97. multidisease area workshop. Neurotherapeutics 2023; published
69 Roberta B, Paolo B, Massimo F, Roberto E. Unexpected (123I)FP-CIT online Oct 12. http://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-023-01440-x.
SPECT findings: SWIDD, SWEDD and all DAT. J Neurol 2022; 92 Koga S, Sekiya H, Kondru N, Ross OA, Dickson DW.
269: 758–70. Neuropathology and molecular diagnosis of synucleinopathies.
70 Marek K, Chowdhury S, Siderowf A, et al. Establishing a Mol Neurodegener 2021; 16: 83.
Parkinson’s disease biomarker cohort. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2018; 93 Ayers JI, Lee J, Monteiro O, et al. Different α-synuclein prion
5: 1460–77. strains cause dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system
71 Stephenson D, Akalu M, Alexander R, et al. Critical path for atrophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2022; 119: e2113489119.
Parkinson’s: catalyzing innovation for Parkinson’s clinical trials 94 Dickson DW. Parkinson’s disease and parkinsonism:
through data sharing and regulatory science. Neurology 2019; neuropathology. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012; 2: a009258.
92: P2·8-010. 95 Garrido A, Fairfoul G, Tolosa E, Marti MJ, Ezquerra M, Green AJE.
72 Seibyl JP. Imaging biomarkers for central nervous system drug Brain and cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein real-time quaking-
development and future clinical utility: lessons from induced conversion identifies Lewy body pathology in LRRK2-PD.
neurodegenerative disorders. J Nucl Med 2023; 64: 12–19. Mov Disord 2023; 38: 333–38.
73 Mitchell T, Lehéricy S, Chiu SY, Strafella AP, Stoessl AJ, 96 Kalia LV, Lang AE, Hazrati LN, et al. Clinical correlations with Lewy
Vaillancourt DE. Emerging neuroimaging biomarkers across body pathology in LRRK2-related Parkinson disease. JAMA Neurol
disease stage in Parkinson disease: a review. JAMA Neurol 2021; 2015; 72: 100–05.
78: 1262–72. 97 Tolosa E, Vila M, Klein C, Rascol O. LRRK2 in Parkinson disease:
74 Tudorascu DL, Minhas DS, Lao PJ, et al. The use of centiloids for challenges of clinical trials. Nat Rev Neurol 2020; 16: 97–107.
applying [11C]PiB classification cutoffs across region-of-interest 98 Dickson DW. Neuropathology of Parkinson disease.
delineation methods. Alzheimers Dement 2018; 10: 332–39. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2018; 46: S30–33.
75 Concha-Marambio L, Weber S, Farris CM, et al. Accurate detection 99 Klos KJ, Ahlskog JE, Josephs KA, et al. Alpha-synuclein pathology
of α-synuclein seeds in cerebrospinal fluid from isolated rapid eye in the spinal cords of neurologically asymptomatic aged individuals.
movement sleep behavior disorder and patients with Parkinson’s Neurology 2006; 66: 1100–02.
disease in the denovo Parkinson (DeNoPa) cohort. Mov Disord 2023;
100 D’Antonio F, Kane JPM, Ibañez A, et al. Dementia with Lewy
38: 567–78.
bodies research consortia: a global perspective from the ISTAART
76 Bidesi NSR, Vang Andersen I, Windhorst AD, Shalgunov V, Lewy body dementias professional interest area working group.
Herth MM. The role of neuroimaging in Parkinson’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 2021; 13: e12235.
J Neurochem 2021; 159: 660–89.
77 Book A, Guella I, Candido T, et al. A meta-analysis of α-synuclein Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
multiplication in familial parkinsonism. Front Neurol 2018; 9: 1021.
190 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 23 February 2024

---PAGE BREAK---

