www.nature.com/npjparkd
ARTICLE OPEN
α
Cathepsin L-containing exosomes from -synuclein-activated
microglia induce neurotoxicity through the P2X7 receptor
✉
TianfangJiang1,5,ChuanyingXu2,5,Shane Gao3,5, JiaZhang1, JiaZheng1, Xiaolin Wu1,Qiuyun Lu1, Limei Cao1,Danjing Yang 4 ,
✉ ✉
JunXu 4 and XuChen 1
UncontrolledmicroglialactivationispivotaltothepathogenesisofParkinson’sdisease(PD),whichcansecreteCathepsinL(CTSL)
toaffectthesurvivalofneuronsinthePDpatients;however,theprecisemechanismhasyettobedetermined.Wedemonstrated
forthefirsttimethatCTSLwasmostlyreleasedbyexosomesderivedfromα-Syn-activatedmicroglia,resultinginneuronaldamage
anddeath.TheelevationofCTSLactivitywasblockedbyGW4869,suggestingacriticalroleforexosomesinmediatingCTSLrelease.
Furthermore, theP2X7R/PI3K/AKT signallingpathway wasidentifiedasthe underlyingmolecular mechanism sincespecific
antagonists ofthis signallingpathway, P2X7Rknockdown andexosome release inhibitors significantly reduced theinjury to
cultured mousecortical neurons.Ourstudy suggests that increased extracellular releaseof CTSLfromα-Syn-activated microglia
throughexosomesamplifiesandaggravatesoftheneurotoxiceffectofmicroglia,implyingthatCTSLmaybeinvolvedinafresh
mechanismofPD pathogenesis, andserve asapotential biomarker anda target forPD drug development.
npjParkinson’s Disease (2022) 8:127 ;https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-022-00394-9
INTRODUCTION oligomers4. Some studies have further suggested that P2X7R
It has become evident that among the known pathological mightaffectthefunctionoflysosomesandincreasethereleaseof
processes associated with Parkinson’s disease (PD), excessive cathepsin12–14 through promotion of the phosphoinositide
microglial activation is undoubtedly a major culprit and that 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT) signalling pathway15. Here,
aggregation of a large number of activated microglia in the we aimed to explore the release pattern of CTSL from α-Syn-
substantianigraparscompacta(SNpc),whichcanbeobservedin activated microglia and determine whether P2X7R is involved in
the early phase of PD, is one of the main pathological this process.
manifestations of the disease1,2 and is the primary source of Exosomes are unconventional small cellular secretory vesicles
inflammatory factors and reactive oxygen species3. Nevertheless, withadiameterof30-100nmthatoriginatefromtheendosomal
the key molecular mechanisms that lead to microglial neurotoxi- system and are released into the extracellular milieu; exosomes
city in PD are poorly defined. The insoluble oligomer form of α- usually act as mediators to promote cell-to-cell communica-
synuclein (α-Syn), a key protein that is strongly implicated in the tion16–18andcanbereleasedinlargequantitiesfromvariouscell
pathogenesisofPD,iscapableofactivatingmicroglia.Thisprocess types in the central nervous system (CNS), including microglia19.
isenhancedbymissensemutationsofα-Syn,especiallytheA53T Intriguingly, microglia-derived exosomes are capable of transfer-
mutation4.Therefore,exploringthespecificmechanismbywhich ring nucleic acids, proteins and lipids, etc., regulating the
α-Syn-activated microglia exert and amplify their toxic effects is extracellular environment and influencing the normal function
very important for identifying new strategies to prevent and
ofneuronsinalargesurroundingarea20,21.Ithasbeenconfirmed
treatPD. that exosomes released by microglia can be internalised by
CathepsinL(CTSL),amemberofthecysteineproteasefamily,is neighbouring neurons through endocytosis. After exosomes are
a partially secreted extracellular protein5. Autopsy results have stereotaxicallyinjectedintothemousebrain,pathogenicproteins
confirmedthattheexpressionlevelofCTSLinthesubstantianigra carried by these exosomes can be detected in neurons of the
of PD patients is markedly increased6, and peripheral blood test recipient animal22,23. However, the role of exosomes in the
results have also indicated that the mRNA level of CTSL in PD pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, especially PD,
patientsissignificantlyhigherthanthatinnormalpeople7.Alarge remains to be elucidated. P2X7R plays some role in regulating
increaseinCTSLlevelsisobservedafterstimulationofmicrogliain the release of exosomes24. Dubyak and Barberà et al. observed
PD models7–9 and followed by an inflammatory outbreak, which thatactivationofP2X7Rbyadenosinetriphosphate(ATP)canlead
may further promote apoptosis of neurons10, affect axonal tothesecretionofvariouscytokinesandproteinsfromcellsinthe
growth11, and lead to neuronal death. These effects can be form of exosomes, which amplifies neurotoxicity25–27. Proteins
blocked by suppressing CTSL, such as by using CTSL inhibitors. carried by exosomes can also serve as useful biomarkers for PD,
Therefore,itisimperativetounderstandtherelationshipbetween implyinga potential association between exosomesand CTSL.
microglia and CTSL-mediated neurotoxicity. Our previous studies In this study, we studied the putative roles of CTSL in the
indicatedapotentialroleforthepurinergicP2X7receptor(P2X7R), pathogenesis and development of PD. We elucidated that CTSL
which mediates the substantial activation of microglia by α-Syn releasedfromα-Syn,mainlyviaexosomes,activatesmicrogliavia
1Department of Neurology, Shanghai Eighth People’s Hospital, 8 Caobao Road, Shanghai, China. 2Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
University,99WestHuaihaiRoad,Xuzhou,JiangsuProvince,China.3DepartmentofNeurosurgery,ShanghaiEastHospitalAffiliatedtoTongjiUniversity,150JimoRoad,Shanghai,
China.4SchoolofMedicine,TongjiUniversity,1239SipingRoad,Shanghai,China.8Theseauthorscontributedequally:TianfangJiang,ChuanyingXu,ShaneGao.
✉
email:djyang@tongji.edu.cn;xunymc2000@yahoo.com;cxwp65@163.com
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation
;,:)(0987654321

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
2
the P2X7R/PI3K/AKT signalling pathway, subsequently mediates microglia. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 1f and g, stimulation
excessive microglial neurotoxicity and causes neuronal death. with α-Syn oligomers did not result in more CTSB secretion
DecreasingthereleaseofCTSL-containingexosomessubstantially through exosomes compared with controls. Meanwhile, non-
reducesthedetrimentaleffectsofactivatedmicrogliaonneurons pathogenic α-Syn monomers and γ-synuclein (γ-Syn), a kind of
inacellular modelof PD. aggregate-prone proteins31, which has been reported to cause
other degenerative diseases and brain tumours32,33, were also
usedtostimulatemicrogliaunderthesameconditions.Theresults
RESULTS showed that neither α-Syn monomers nor γ-Syn aggregation
Extracellular α-Syn oligomers-induced microglial activation inducedsignificantreleaseofCTSL-containingexosomecompared
increases CTSL andexosome release with the control group (Supplementary Fig. 1h, i). There were no
Asdiscussedearlier,CTSLishighlyexpressedinmicrogliaandcan statistically significant differences in the above experimental
bedetectedinthebodyfluidsofPDpatients28,29.Toevaluatethe results.
effects of α-Syn oligomers-induced microglial activation on the
release of CTSL, primary microglia were stimulated with 250nM CTSL releasefrom α-Syn oligomers-activated microglia is
recombinantwild-type(WT)orA53Tα-Synoligomers.Thevolume mostlymediated by exosomes
of the supernatant normalised to the corresponding whole-cell To investigate whether CTSL is released via exosomes, microglia
protein concentration was used to reflect the amount of CTSL were treated with WT or A53T α-Syn oligomer, and then
secreted from the same number of cells. Western blot analysis colocalization of CTSL with the exosomal marker TSG101 was
showed that both WT and A53T α-Syn oligomers promoted the assessed using immunofluorescence staining (Fig. 2a). The
release of CTSL from microglia into the supernatant in a time- colocalization of CTSL and the exosome marker TSG101 was
dependent manner. CTSL was released after 1h of stimulation increasedinatime-dependentmannerandwasmostobviousfor
with α-Syn oligomers, and the highest level of CTSL release was up to 6h. Therefore, considering the results of immunofluores-
reached at 6h, with the levels of CTSL being increased at earlier cence and western blot analysis, we chose 6h as the treatment
time points when A53T α-Syn oligomer was used as a stimulant time point for all subsequent experiments. We measured CTSL
(Fig.1a,b).Notably,100ng/mlLPSwasusedasapositivecontrol levels in both the exosome-enriched and exosome-depleted
(Supplementary Fig. 1a, b). We further attempted to determine supernatant fractions of α-Syn oligomers-treated and untreated
whether microglia can release a large number of exosomes after microgliabywesternblotanalysis.Weobservedthatthemajority
stimulation with α-Syn oligomers. Therefore, the exosome-rich of CTSL was concentrated in exosomes, while CTSL was almost
fractionwasisolatedandpurifiedfromthemicrogliasupernatant. undetectable or was only present at a very low level in the
TEM revealed that the exosomes exhibited a cup-shaped exosome-depleted fraction (Fig. 2b, c). Bovine serum albumin
morphology(Fig.1c).Toquantitativelyevaluateexosomerelease, (BSA) protein was detected in only exosomes-depleted super-
three different exosome analysis techniques were used. First, the natantsofeachgroupasloadingcontrol(SupplementaryFig.1j).
sizeand number of isolated exosomes were determined by NTA. We next assessed the activity of CTSL in exosomes, and similar
Intriguingly, we demonstrated that many more exosomes were experiments were performed. CTSL activity in the exosome-
secreted from microglia treated with either form of α-Syn enrichedfractionfromeachoftheα-Synoligomers-treatedgroups
oligomers, especially those treated with α-A53T Syn, than from was significantly increased (Fig. 2d). Furthermore, to assess
control microglia (Fig. 1d). Second, as expected, similar results, whether exosome-mediated release is the main mechanism of
suggesting that α-Syn oligomers activation led to increased CTSLreleasefromα-Synoligomers-activatedmicroglia,wetreated
releaseofexosomesfrommicrogliawereobtainedwiththeFlow the cultured cells with GW4869, a membrane neutral sphingo-
Nano Analyser (Fig. 1e). The relevant quantitative data were myelinase (nSMase) inhibitor, for 24h prior to exosome isolation.
showed in Supplementary Fig. 1c. Third, secreted exosomes GW4869 has been confirmed to markedly reduce exosome
isolatedfromthesamenumberofcellsweresubjectedtowestern release, and preincubating cells with 0.5–20µM GW4869 can
blotanalysisofspecificexosomemarkers,includingCD63,TSG101 prevent exosome production34,35. We used DMSO (the same
andAlix.Thesethreemarkerproteinswerehighlyenrichedinthe volume of DMSO as that in 10µM GW4869) as a control for
WTandA53Tα-Synoligomers-treatedmicrogliafor6hcompared GW4869 because GW4869 was dissolved in DMSO. Incubation
withtheuntreatedmicroglia;inaddition,ahighlevelofCTSLwas with GW4869 not only strikingly reduced the levels of CD63 and
also detected in the released exosomes isolated from the TSG101butalsodiminishedthelevelofCTSLinexosomesisolated
supernatant of α-Syn oligomers-stimulated microglia (Fig. 1f, g). from α-Syn oligomers-activated microglia, confirming that exo-
Moreover, to eliminate the effect of α-Syn oligomer itself, we somescarriedCTSLascargo(Fig.2e,f).LPS(100ng/ml)wasused
measured α-Syn levels in the exosome samples. The data in as a positive control (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). Taken together,
SupplementaryFig.1ddemonstratethatexosomesfrommicroglia our results revealed that α-Syn oligomer increases CTSL release
contained very little α-Syn protein. In addition, actin was only frommicroglia viaexosomes.
detectable in the cell lysates, while CD63 and TSG101 were also
detectable in the cell lysates, demonstrating the absence of Extracellular α-Syn oligomers stimulate the release ofCTSL-
cellular components and other vesicles in the exosome prepara- containingexosomes frommicroglia throughP2X7R
tions (Supplementary Fig. 1e). Furthermore, to eliminate the As discussed earlier, in our previous experiments, we demon-
possibility that the increased number of exosomes observed in strated that α-Syn oligomers interacts with P2X7R in BV2 cells4.
conditioned medium from microglia treated with LPS or α-Syn Here, co-IP and western blotting were used to confirm that this
oligomerswasduetodisruptionofthecellplasmamembraneby phenomenon occurs in microglia (Fig. 3a), meanwhile, immunos-
these treatments, we measured LDH levels in the medium. The taining using antibodies against α-Syn oligomers and P2X7R for
results indicated that no cell breakage was detected at the up to 6h also showed the interaction between the two proteins
sublethalconcentrationsused(Fig.1h).Ontheotherhand,other (Fig. 3b). In co-IP experiment, A53T α-Syn oligomer interacted
cathepsins, such as Cathepsin B (CTSB), is also reported to be more strongly with P2X7R than WT α-Syn oligomer. The α-Syn
released via exosomes30, in consequence, to further confirm the oligomer,ratherthanthemonomerform,haslongbeenidentified
specific pathogenic role of α-Syn oligomers-induced CTSL secre- as the pathogenic protein of PD36. As an additional control
tionfrommicrogliainPDpathogenesis,wealsodetectedtheCTSB experiment, similar coimmunoprecipitation experiments were
level in exosomes secreted by α-Syn oligomers-activated performed on the α-Syn monomers. As shown in Supplementary
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation
;,:)(0987654321

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
3
Fig. 1 Extracellular α-Syn oligomers promote microglial CTSL and exosome release, and exosomes carry CTSL in α-Syn-activated
microglia in a time-dependent manner. a, b Western blot and quantitative analysis of CTSL release from microglia stimulated with
extracellular WT or A53T α-Syn oligomer for up to 6h (n=4); *p<0.05. c Representative TEM images of exosomes isolated from the
supernatantofprimarymicroglia.Scalebar:200nm.d,eAnalysisoftheparticlenumberandsizeofmicroglia-derivedexosomesfromthe
differenttreatmentgroupsbyNTAandaFlowNanoAnalyser(n=4).f,gTheresultsofWesternblotanalysisshowingthepresenceofthe
exosomalmarkersCD63,TSG101andAlix,andahighlevelofCTSLinexosomesfromWTandA53Tα-Synoligomer-activatedmicroglia(n=4);
***p<0.001.hLDHlevelsinthemicroglialculturemediumweremeasuredbyELISAafterdifferenttreatments(n=6).Ctrl=untreatedcontrol.
Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
Fig. 2d, neither WT α-Syn monomer nor A53T α-Syn monomer BzATP treatment (Fig. 3c, d) and that the secretion of CTSL
interacted with P2X7R. These observations suggest that α-Syn occurred mainly through exosomes (Fig. 3e, f). Moreover,
oligomers may induce CTSL-containing exosome release by incubation with Brilliant Blue G (BBG), a P2X7R antagonist,
interacting with P2X7R. To test this hypothesis, we first treated 10min before α-Syn oligomers treatment significantly reduced
microglia with 100mM 2’(3’)-O-(4-benzoylbenzoyl) adenosine 5’- the secretion of CTSL via exosomes in both the WT and A53T α-
triphosphate(BzATP),aP2X7Ragonistthatis10-foldmorepotent Syn oligomers-treated groups (Fig. 3e, f), implying the involve-
than ATP37, with 250nM BSA being used as a negative control ment of P2X7R activation in this process. Similar results were
SupplementaryFig.2c).Ourresultsshowedthatthehighestlevel obtained when P2X7R was knocked down in microglia before
of CTSL release from microglia occurred approximately 6h after treatment with α-Syn oligomers (Fig. 3g, h). These investigations
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
4
Fig.2 Themainmechanism bywhich CTSLisreleased fromα-Synoligomers-activated isexosome-mediated release.a Representative
confocal microscopy images of immunofluorescence staining for CTSL and the specific exosome marker TSG101. When primary microglia
were activated by treatment with WTor A53T α-Syn oligomer for up to 6h, the colocalization of CTSL and TSG101 (indicated by arrows)
increased over time (n=3). Scale bar: 50μm. b, c The cell supernatant and secreted exosomes were isolated from the same number of
microglia,andtheproteinlevelsofCTSLinboththeexosome-enrichedandexosome-depletedfractionswereassayedbywesternblotting
(n=4); *p<0.05. d Measurement of CTSL activity in exosome-enriched lysates from untreated and α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia.
Exosomelysateswithouttheadditionofsubstratewereusedasbackgroundcontrols(n=6);***p<0.001.e,fExosomeswereisolatedfrom
thesupernatants ofcontrol microglial and WTand A53Tα-Syn oligomer-treated microglia inthe presence andabsence of GW4869. CTSL,
CD63, and TSG101 levels in exosome lysates were measured by western blotting (n=4); *p<0.05, **p<0.01. Ctrl=untreated control;
exo=exosome;GW5=5μMGW4869;GW10=10μMGW4869.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
provide evidence that extracellular α-Syn oligomers can directly pretreated with 2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-
interact with and activate P2X7R and trigger CTSL release from 4-one (LY294002), a potent and specific cell-permeable
microgliathrough exosomes. inhibitor of PI3K, phosphorylation of AKT was effectively
suppressed (Fig. 4a, b). Moreover, pretreatment with
α-Syn oligomers activate CTSL-containing exosome release LY294002 markedly decreased the secretion of CTSL via
frommicroglia viathe P2X7R/PI3K/AKT signalling pathway exosomes (Fig. 4c, d). Our results have thus far revealed that
To identify the specific signalling pathways downstream of α-SynoligomerspromoteCTSL-containingexosomereleaseina
P2X7R,wenextassessedthepotentialinvolvementofthePI3K/ manner that is dependent upon PI3K/AKT signalling.
AKT pathway in α-Syn oligomers-induced CTSL release. Aber- We next analysed the expression of p-AKT after P2X7R was
rant signalling through the PI3K/AKT pathway has been knockeddowntoidentifywhetherP2X7RisupstreamofthePI3K/
implicated in both PD38 and the expression and secretion of AKT signalling pathway. As expected, knockdown of P2X7R
CTSL15. To determine the role of PI3K/AKT signalling in rescued the increase in p-AKT expression in microglia in the WT
promoting CTSL-containing exosome release, the level of and A53T α-Syn oligomers-treated groups compared with the
phospho-AKT (p-AKT) was measured in the WT and A53T α- controlandscramblesiRNA-treatedgroups(Fig.4e,f).Collectively,
Syn oligomers-treated groups and the control group. Stimula- theseresultssuggestthattheP2X7R/PI3K/AKTsignallingpathway
tionofmicrogliawithWTorA53Tα-Synoligomerresultedinan isstronglylinkedtoCTSL-containingexosomereleasefromα-Syn
increase in p-AKT expression, and when microglia were oligomers-treated microglia.
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
5
Fig. 3 P2X7R is necessary for the release of CTSL-containing exosomes from α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia. a Extracellular α-Syn
oligomerinteractswithP2X7R.Westernblotanalysisofα-SynexpressioninmicrogliaaftertreatmentwithWTorA53Tα-Synoligomerforup
to 6h. WTand A53T α-Syn oligomer were coimmunoprecipitated with P2X7R, with A53T α-Syn oligomer showing a stronger interaction.
bRepresentativeconfocalmicroscopyimagesofimmunofluorescencestainingforα-Syn(red)andP2X7R(green)aftertreatmentwithA53Tor
WTα-Synoligomerforupto6htoobservecolocalization(indicatedbyarrows).Scalebar:50μm.c,dWesternblotandquantitativeanalysisof
CTSLreleasefromthesupernatantofmicrogliastimulatedwithBzATP(100μM),anagonistofP2X7R,forupto6h(n=4);*p<0.05.e,fBzATP
obviouslyinducedCTSLreleasefromα-Synoligomers-activatedmicrogliaviaexosomes,whilepretreatmentwithBBG(1μM),anantagonistof
P2X7R,effectivelyreversedCTSL-containingexosomerelease(n=4);*p<0.05,**p<0.01.g,hWesternblotandquantitativeanalysisofP2X7R
expression in microglia transfected with nonspecific (scramble siRNA) (20nM) or P2X7R siRNA (20nM) to confirm P2X7R knockdown.
DensitometricanalysisofthenumberofCTSL-containingexosomesreleasedfrommicrogliatransfectedwithscrambleorP2X7RsiRNAafter
treatment with WT or A53T α-Syn oligomer for 6h (n=4); *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. Ctr=untreated control; Scr=scramble;
siP2X7R=P2X7RsiRNA.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia exert neurotoxic effects blocked by increasing concentrations of GW4869 (Fig. 5c, d).
throughthe release ofCTSL-containing exosomes Consistently,treatmentwithGW4869priortoexosomeisolation
Excessive activation of microglia, which involves the release of rescued exosome-induced neurotoxicity in a dose-dependent
exosomes, is believed to contribute to neuronal death in manner,asshownbyMAP2immunostaining(Fig.6),illustrating
neurodegenerative diseases, and mechanisms by which the the obvious role of exosomes in the neurotoxicity of α-Syn
CNS is damaged are very complicated and involve much more oligomers-treated microglia. Furthermore, microglia were pre-
than inflammation and oxidative stress39. To investigate the incubated with or without the CTSL inhibitor NapSul-Ile-Trp-
adverse impact of CTSL secreted from α-Syn oligomers-treated CHO(iCL)(20mM)for 12hbeforeα-Synoligomersstimulation.
microglia on neurons, exosomes isolated from the microglial As expected, pretreatment with iCL significantly ameliorated
supernatantwereresuspendedinneurobasalmediumandthen neuronal apoptosis, verifying that inhibition of CTSL directly
cocultured with neurons. The volume of culture medium used rescued neuronal death (Figs. 5e, f and 6). In addition, to
to resuspend the exosomes was adjusted based on the strengthen this conclusion, similar treatments were performed
exosomal protein concentration from microglia to ensure that in the setting of CTSL knockdown in microglia. Cleaved-
theconcentrationofexosomeswasconsistentperunitvolume caspase-3wassharplyattenuated,butnotcompletelyinhibited,
ofresuspending,thereforethesameamountofexosomescould in neuron cells treated with conditioned media from α-Syn
be used for co-culture with each group of neurons in oligomers-activatedmicrogliatransfectedwithCTSLsiRNA(Fig.
subsequent experiments. To explore the effect of CTSL- 5g).FurthermoretheexpressionlevelsofCTSLinWTandA53T
containing exosomes released from microglia on neuronal α-Syn oligomers-activated microglia were upregulated, and
apoptosis,weinitiallyassessedneurotoxicitybyquantifyingthe correspondingly, after CTSL was knocked down, the level of
expression of the apoptotic protein caspase-3 by western CTSL in exosomes secreted by α-Syn oligomers-activated
blotting (Fig. 5a–f) and the neuronal marked MAP2 by microglia reduced significantly, but the amount of exosomes
immunostaining (Fig. 6). Similar to prior experiments, we used itself did not decrease (Fig. 5h). Our results confirmed α-Syn
LPS as a positive control (Fig. 5a, b), and the same volume of oligomers not only regulate the release of CTSL-containing
DMSOadministeredtotheGW4869treatmentgroupswasused exosomes by activating the P2X7R/PI3K/AKT signalling path-
asanegativecontrol.The neurotoxic effectof CTSL-containing way, but also regulate the expression level of CTSL, making it
exosomes released from activated microglia was mostly play a crucial role in causing neuronal death.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
6
Fig. 4 P2X7R stimulates PI3K/AKT signalling in microglia in response to extracellular α-Syn oligomers, and α-Syn oligomers activate
microglialCTSL-containingexosomereleaseviatheP2X7R/PI3K/AKTsignallingpathway.a,bp-AKTlevelsinmicrogliawereincreasedafter
treatmentwithWTorA53Tα-Synoligomer,withA53Tα-SynoligomercausingamoresignificantincreaseinAKTphosphorylation.Inhibition
of PI3K by LY294002 (50μM) blocked α-Syn-induced phosphorylation of AKT (n=4); *p<0.05. c, d Exosomes were isolated from the
supernatants of control and α-Syn oligomer-treated microglia in the presence or absence of LY294002. CTSL, CD63, and TSG101 levels in
exosome lysates were quantitatively analysed by western blotting (n=4); *p<0.05. e, f p-AKT expression in microglia transfected with
scrambleorP2X7RsiRNAafterstimulationwithWTorA53Tα-Synoligomer.KnockdownofP2X7Rrescuedtheincreaseinp-AKTexpressionin
BV2 cells in response to stimulation with WTor A53T α-Syn oligomer, implying that α-Syn oligomer-mediated stimulation of P2X7R is an
upstreameventthatactivatesPI3K/AKTsignallingandultimatelyCTSL-containingexosomerelease(n=4);*p<0.05.Ctrl=untreatedcontrol;
LY=LY294002;Scr=scramble;siP2X7R=P2X7RsiRNA.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
7
Fig. 5 CTSL-containing exosomes released from activated microglia promote apoptosis of neurons. a, b Primary cortical neurons were
treatedwithexosomesisolatedfrommicrogliatreatedwithorwithoutWTorA53Tα-Synoligomer.Westernblotandquantitativeanalysisof
cleaved-caspase-3expressioninneuronstreatedfor24hwithexosomesfromuntreatedmicrogliaormicrogliatreatedwithLPSorWTorA53T
α-Syn oligomer (n=3); ***p<0.001. c, d The level neuronal apoptosis was determined after co-culture with exosomes from microglia
pretreatedwithorwithoutGW4869(n=3);*p<0.05,**p<0.01,***p<0.001.e,fThelevelofapoptosisofneuronscoculturedwithexosomes
from microglia treated with or without iCL (n=3); **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. g Western blot and quantitative analysis of CTSL expression in
microgliatransfectedwithnonspecific(scramblesiRNA)(20nM)orP2X7RsiRNA(20nM)toconfirmCTSLknockdown.Exosomessecretedbyα-
Syn oligomers-activated CTSL knockdown microglia induce less neuronal death (n=3). h Densitometric analysis of the number of CTSL-
containingexosomesreleasedfrommicrogliatransfectedwithscrambleorCTSLsiRNAaftertreatmentwithWTorA53Tα-Synoligomerfor6h
(n=3);*p<0.05,**p<0.01,***p<0.001.Theamountofexosomesusedineachgroupwassecretedbyapproximately3*107microgliacells.
Ctrl=untreatedcontrol;Scr=scramble;siCTSL=CTSLsiRNA;EC=exosomesfromuntreatedmicroglia(thecontrolgroup);EL=exosomes
from LPS-treated microglia; EW=exosomes from WT α-Syn oligomer-treated microglia; EA=exosomes from A53T α-Syn oligomer-treated
microglia;ED=exosomesfromDMSO-treatedmicroglia;EiCL=exosomesfromiCL-treatedmicroglia;GW5=5μMGW4869;GW10=10μM
GW4869;EsiCTSL=exosomesfromCTSLknockdownmicroglia.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
ExosomesmediateextracellulartransmissionofCTSLbetween the CTSL inhibitor iCL. Results showed that iCL pretreatment
microglia andneurons reduced the expression of microglial CTSL (Fig. 7d, e), and as a
As shown by the results described above, exosomes obtained consequence,iCLpretreatmentledtoadecreaseinthesecretion
fromα-Synoligomers-treatedmicrogliacancarryCTSL.Exosomes ofCTSLthroughexosomesandreducedinternalisationofCTSLby
can fuse with the plasma membrane of recipient cells, releasing neurons (Fig. 7f–i). There was no significant decrease in the
cargo directly into the cytosol, or can be internalised by amount of exosome release in the iCL pretreatment groups (Fig.
endocytosis40. To determine whether CTSL-containing exosome 7h, i). Again, these results provide strong evidence that CTSL in
uptake occurred after neurons were cocultured with exosomes exosomes is the main culprit of microglia-mediated neuronal
secreted by microglia, we labelled purified exosomes with the toxicity.
membrane dye PKH67 and then added these PKH67+ exosomes
toprimaryneurons.Theresultsshowedthatafterα-Synoligomers
DISCUSSION
treatment, the internalisation of exosomes by neurons was
obviously increased (Fig. 7a). Subsequently, we assessed the Ourprevious studies identified extracellular α-Syn oligomers asa
expressionofCTSLinneuronscoculturedwithexosomescollected potential inducer of microglial activation, which significantly
frommicroglia-conditionedmediumbywesternblotanalysis.Co- contributes to neuronal damage and thus accelerates the
culturewithexosomesfrommicrogliastimulatedwithWTorA53T progression of PD. However, the key molecular mechanisms
α-Syn oligomer resulted in an obvious increase in CTSL levels in remain unknown. Combining proteomics technology and mole-
neurons,aswellastheamountofexosomes(Fig.7b,c).Itseemed cular analyses, our present study clearly reveals that CTSL-
that exosomes facilitated transmission of CTSL over a long containing exosomes exert a neurotoxic effect during excessive
distance and were eventually endocytosed by neurons. Interest- microglial activation. First, using a well-characterised human
ingly,aftermicrogliaweretreatedwithGW4869for24handthen recombinant α-Syn oligomers-induced microglial activation
treated with WT or A53T α-Syn oligomer, GW4869 markedly model, we showed that exosomes released from these microglia
reduced the internalisation of CTSL-containing exosomes by contained CTSL, which is a key enzyme involved in the
neurons (Fig. 7b, c). These results suggest that CTSL-containing pathogenesis of PD, and that CTSL was released from α-Syn
exosomes were able to infect heathy neurons and that reducing oligomers-treated microglia into the extracellular fluid primarily
the release of CTSL-containing exosomes from microglia could via exosomes. Second, we demonstrated that BzATP, a classic
reducethetransmission ofCTSL toneurons. agonist of P2X7R, obviously increased the number of CTSL-
We next assessed the CTSL level in neurons cocultured with containing exosomes released from microglia, which was
conditionedmediumfrommicrogliapreincubatedwithorwithout decreased in the P2X7R antagonist pretreatment groups and
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
8
Fig. 6 Representative immunofluorescence images of neurons labelled with MAP2 illustrating the neurotoxic potential of CTSL-
containing exosomes. a, b Treatment with GW4869 or the CTSL inhibitor iCL (20μM) prior to exosome isolation rescued CTSL-containing
exosome-induced neurotoxicity in a dose-dependent manner in each experimental group, as determined by MAP2 immunostaining,
suggesting a direct neurotoxic role for CTSL released from α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia. Scale bar: 50μm. c Quantification of the
percentageofMAP2+neuronsfortheexperimentsdepictedinpanelsa(up)andb(down).Resultsarerepresentativeof threefluorescent
imagesofeachgroupfromthreeindependentexperiments.Theamountofexosomesusedineachgroupwassecretedbyapproximately104
microglia cells. EC=exosomes from untreated microglia (the control group); EW=exosomes from WT α-Syn oligomer-treated microglia;
EA=exosomesfromA53Tα-Synoligomer-treatedmicroglia;ED=exosomesfromDMSO-treatedmicroglia;EiCL=exosomesfromiCL-treated
microglia;GW5=5μMGW4869;GW10=10μMGW4869.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
9
Fig. 7 Secretion ofexosomes by microglia is responsible for the transmission of CTSL to neurons. a Exosomesisolated from the same
volumeofculturemediumfrommicrogliaexposedtodifferentexperimentalconditionswerelabelledwiththedyePKH67.Theseexosomes
werethenaddedtorecipientneuronsandincubatedfor1day.Theneuronswerethenfixedwith4%PFA(n=3).Exosomessecretedbyα-Syn
oligomers-treatedmicrogliawereendocytosedbyneurons(spot-shaped,indicatedbyarrows).Theamountofexosomesusedineachgroup
was secreted by approximately 104 microglia cells. Scale bar: 50μm. b, c The level of CTSL, CD63 and TSG101 in neurons cocultured with
exosomesfrommicrogliapretreatedwithorwithoutGW4869wasmeasuredbywesternblottingandquantitativelyanalysed(n=3);*p<0.05,
**p<0.01.GW4869treatmentreducedexosomeinternalisationbyneurons,resultinginlowersCTSLexpression.d,ePretreatmentwiththe
CTSL inhibitor iCL decreased the expression of CTSL in microglia, as determined by western blotting and quantitative analysis (n=3);
*p<0.05,**p<0.01,***p<0.001.f,gDuetotheinhibitoryeffectofiCL,lessCTSLwasreleasedbyα-Syn-activatedmicrogliaandinternalised
byneurons(n=3);*p<0.05.h,iCTSL,CD63,andTSG101expressioninexosomelysatesfrommicrogliawasmeasuredbywesternblotting.
AdministrationofiCLpriortoactivationwithα-Syndidnotaffectthereductioninexosomereleasefrommicroglia,whichonceagainproves
thatCTSL,notexosomes,isresponsibleforneuronaldamage(n=3);***p<0.001.Theamountofexosomesusedineachgroupwassecreted
byapproximately3*107microgliacells.EC=exosomesfromuntreatedmicroglia(thecontrolgroup);EW=exosomesfromWTα-Syn-treated
microglia; EA=exosomes from A53T α-Syn-treated microglia; ED=exosomes from DMSO-treated microglia; EiCL=exosomes from iCL-
treatedmicroglia;Ctrl=untreatedcontrol;GW5=5μMGW4869;GW10=10μMGW4869.Errorbarsrepresents.e.m.
P2X7R knockdown groups. Interestingly, activation of PI3K/AKT observations, we propose that CTSL is released from activated
signalling downstream of P2X7R was confirmed to affect the microglia via exosomes through the P2X7R/PI3K/AKT signalling
release of CTSL-containing exosomes, while an inhibitor of PI3K pathway and that exosomal CTSL may be used as a potential
suppressed α-Syn oligomers-induced microglial activation and biomarkerofPD for earlydiagnosis and prognosis.
reduced the release of exosomes and CTSL. Third, activation of Uncontrolledmicroglialactivation,whichisacriticalcontributor
P2X7R/PI3K/AKT signalling was required for the neurotoxic effect tothepathogenesisofPD,isaninevitableandmajorresponseto
of CTSL-containing exosomes from α-Syn oligomers-induced CNS insult41,42. Indeed, activated microglia secrete the lysosome
microglia, resulting in the death of primary neurons. Finally, we protease CTSL6,28,43, and CTSL has been found to be involved in
used PKH67 to label exosomes and investigated the effects of some in vitro and in vivo models of several neurodegenerative
microglia on CTSL transmission in the brain. Based on these diseases,includingPD44;however,fewstudieshaveexploredthe
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
10
specific mechanism of CTSL secretion by microglia and clarified membraneorlysosomal,etc.),thusthisisalsowhatwewillfurther
whethersecretedCTSLcontributestothepathogenesisofPD.Our exploreinfuture experiments.
currentresearchexactlyfillsthisgap,asourdatanotonlyprovide Intheaboveresultswehaveestablishedthatα-Synoligomers-
solid evidence for the role of CTSL as a pathogenic protein that stimulation did not cause microglia to secrete CTSB through
causes neuronal death in PD but also prove that exosome- exosomes. Next, we found that knockdown of the CTSL reduced
mediated release is the main mechanism by which CTSL is theCTSL-secretedcapacityofα-Synoligomers-activatedmicroglia
released from the cytosol of α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia and partially alleviated the neurotoxicity of CTSL-containing
into the extracellular compartment. Previous studies have exosomes on neurons. With further analysis, we observed the
suggested that extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosome- level of CTSL in α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia increased
like vesicles, are released from specialised cells and contain the obviously, leading to the increase of CTSL secretion in exosomes
protease CTSLand many immunomodulatory molecules that can (Figs. 5g and 7d, e). To summarise, CTSL is a key component
be delivered to host cells45,46. Consistent with these results, by involved in α-Syn oligomers-mediated microglial damage to
usingawell-establishedcellularmodelofPD,weobservedthatα- neurons. Previous studies have confirmed that microglia are
Synoligomers-inducedmicroglialactivationledtomarkedrelease actively involved in the process of cell-to-cell transmission of
ofCTSLintothecellsupernatantinatime-dependentmanner.In proteins through the release of exosomes50, which is consistent
addition, administration of a classical inhibitor of exosomes, with our findings that the microglia-to-neuron transmission of
GW4869, resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in the levels of CTSL-containingexosomesleadstoaviciousneurotoxiccycle.We
bothCTSLandexosome.Therefore,weconcludedthatexosomes observed that PKH67 labelled exosomes secreted by microglia
are the primary facilitators of CTSL release by α-Syn oligomers- were endocytosed by neurons. Meanwhile, the expression of
treatedmicroglia. exosomalmarkersincelllysatessampleofneuronsalsoincreased
PreviousresearchrevealedthatactivationofP2X7Rcanregulate evidently (Fig. 7b). Notably a significant increase in neuronal
the secretion of exosomes by microglia47. We proposed that apoptosis and a decrease in MAP2 expression, which regulates
P2X7Risakeycontributortoα-Synoligomers-mediatedmicroglial neuronal development and structural stability. Taken together,
activation in a previous study, and the obvious and strong these results suggest that inhibiting the release of CTSL-
interaction between α-Syn oligomers and P2X7R was verified in containing exosomes might be a neoteric therapeutic approach
thecurrentresearch.Wenextexploredthepotentialinvolvement for the treatment of PD in patients. Even more importantly,
of P2X7R in the release of CTSL-containing exosomes from because CTSL is abundantly expressed in both the CNS and
microglia induced by extracellular α-Syn oligomers, given that peripheral blood51,52, qualitative or quantitative changes in
this receptor has been reported to be closely associated with exosomal CTSL levels may be a new and accessible biomarker
cytokine-independent release of CTSL from macrophages in fortheearly diagnosis ofPD.
patients with rheumatoid arthritis48 and that ATP-induced CTSL Aconsistentobservationthroughoutthisinvestigationwasthat
releaseisabolishedbyP2X7RantagonistsandinP2X7R−/−mice13. regardless of time or quantity, the A53T mutant is much more
Our findings demonstrated that P2X7R is a key contributor to potentthanWTα-SynoligomerinactivatingthereleaseofCTSL-
CTSL-containing exosome release. Furthermore, we showed that containingexosomesfrommicroglia.Onepossiblereasonforthis
the P2X7R agonist BzATP significantly promoted the secretion of isthattherearestructuraldifferencesbetweenthetwooligomers,
CTSL and that P2X7R knockdown and BBG administration and A53T mutation has been shown to be more neurotoxic and
prevented the release of most exosomes and the CTSL they more prone to aggregate into oligomers53,54, resulting in more
carried. In addition, we confirmed that CTSL is transported sustained microglia activation55,56. Although the molecular
between microglia and neurons, as CTSL-containing exosomes mechanisms underlying α-Syn aggregation remain unknown, the
were endocytosed by neurons. It has been reported that A53Tmutanthasbiasformoreopenstructures,withthepotential
exosomestransporttodistalsitesandinternalisedintoneighbour- of binding more biological macromolecule like proteins54. This
ing target cells through endocytosis or membrane fusion49, viewisconsistentwithourfindingsandsuggestanotherpossible
Consequently, cell-to-cell transmission of CTSL could be one of reason that there is a stronger interaction between A53T α-Syn
the major mechanisms of PD progression and deterioration. This oligomerandP2X7R(asdemonstratedinFig.3),whichleadstoan
process could be mediated by several mechanisms of cellular enhanceddownstreameffect.Alternatively,theA53Tmutantmay
releaseanduptake,andthemechanismofCTSLuptakewillbethe provoke the release of CTSL through another signalling pathway
focus of our future research. Notably, we observed an obvious besidesthePI3K/AKTpathway,whichmeritsfurtherinvestigation
decrease in both the number of exosomes and the amount of in the future. Given these original findings, the domains that
CTSLsecretedby α-Synoligomers-stimulated microglia after BBG mediate the interaction between α-Syn oligomer and P2X7R will
pretreatment; however, secretion was not completely blocked. beexploredinsubsequentstudies,andmeanwhilewewillprove
This phenomenon can be explained by the activation of surface thismechanisminPDpatients,whichmaybeapromisingstrategy
receptorsthatalsopromoteexosomesecretionotherthanP2X7R forinnovative treatment ofPD.
onmicroglia.Exosomesecretionhasnospecificity,butaccording Insummary,thisstudyidentifiesCTSL-containingexosomeasa
totheresultswedescribedabove,thereleaseofCTSL,onecargo toxic mediator in synapse loss and neuron death in α-Syn
of exosomes, by α-Syn oligomers-activated microglia through oligomers-induced microglial activation via P2X7R/PI3K/AKT sig-
P2X7R is specific to some extent, and other signalling pathways nalling pathway. Based on the above findings, using a siRNA
mightparticipate inthis process. specific for P2X7R or an inhibitor of P2X7R/PI3K reverses
Another important observation of this study is that the neurotoxicity by attenuating the release of the exosomal CTSL.
neurotoxicity of α-Syn oligomers-treated microglia was almost Ourdatahighlightthepotentialcellularmechanismsbytargeting
abolished by pretreatment with GW4869, which indicates that P2X7R, the key membrane protein of α-Syn oligomers-activated
CTSL-containing exosomes are the neurotoxic factors in α-Syn microgliaandP2X7R-mediatedsecretorypathwayofexosomesis
oligomers-treatedmicroglia.Next,weuseiCL,aninhibitorofCTSL. responsible for the progressive spread of the microglial neuro-
Strikingly, iCL treatment reduced damage to neurons, which toxicity and cell death in neighbouring neurons. We report that
indicates that CTSL-carrying exosomes from microglia are microglia are actively involved in the process of cell-to-cell
sufficient to induce the major pathological features of PD. As far transmission of CTSL through the release of exosomes, and also
asweknow,therearenospecificstudiesonthemechanismofiCL. proposeanewavenueforneuroprotectiveinterventionstrategies
In our study, the binding place of iCL and CTSL is not clear (cell ofPDbyblockingthesecretionofCTSL-containingexosomes.To
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
11
manipulate this specific pathway, at least in theory, could be an neocorticaltissuesfrommalepupswereplatedina175cm2flask
effective way totreat PDpatients. coated with poly-L-ornithine (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). After approxi-
mately12–14daysinvitro,theflaskswereshakenvigorously,and
themediumwascollectedandcentrifugedat1000rpmfor5min
METHODS to obtain a microglial pellet. For obtain purified exosomes from
Reagentsand antibodies thecellculturesupernatant,primarymicrogliawereresuspended
Anti CTSL, anti Alix and anti P2X7R were purchased from Santa in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 10% exosome-depleted FBS
CruzBiotechnology.AntiTSG101,antiCD63,antiα-synucleinand (SBI, USA) and 50U/ml PS and separately seeded on poly-L-
anti β-actin were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA, St. Louis, ornithine-coatedcoverslipsin12-wellplatesand10cmdishesfor
Missouri).AntiAKT,antip-AKT,anticaspase-3andantiMAP2were
follow-upexperiments.Thecellpuritywasconfirmedtobe>98%
purchasedfromCellSignallingTechnology(USA).AntiCD11band by immunofluorescence using CD11b as a marker of microglia
anti BSA were purchased from Abcam (UK). Anti CTSB was (SupplementaryFig. 2e).
purchased from Proteintech (Wuhan, China). Purified human To establish our cell model, purified human recombinant WT
recombinant γ-Syn was purchased from absin (Shanghai, China) andA53Tα-Syn(rPeptide,Athens,USA)weredissolvedinddH 2 O
and endotoxin content of peptide was <0.1ng/μg (1 IEU/μg) as to create a 1mg/ml stock solution and incubated at 37°C in 5%
CO for7dayswithconstantagitationbyusingaminiTeflonstir
determined by limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) test determined 2
bar to yield oligomeric α-Syn according to previous litera-
atabsin.
tures59–61. Since potential contamination of endotoxin may
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from Escherichia coli 026:B6 were
confoundtheresultsofα-Synonmicroglialactivation,theamount
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA, St. Louis, Missouri) and
dissolvedinH Otocreatea20ng/μlofstocksolution. LY294002 of endotoxin in the purified α-Syn was determined at r-Peptide.
2 Theresultshowedthatthecontentofendotoxinwas<1.3U/mgof
waspurchasedfromThermoFisher(UK)anddissolvedindimethyl
peptide,whichwasconsistentwithpreviousstudiesandincapable
sulfoxideto createastock solution of 25mg/ml. BzATP,BBGand
ofproducing any significantneurotoxicity59,62.
GW4869 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA, St. Louis,
Missouri).
iCL was purchased from Enzo (USA) and it is a biomimetic Characterisation ofpurified α-synuclein aggregation
materialdevelopedandsynthesisedbasedonE-64andleupeptin, The procedures for protein oligomers negative-staining were
two natural inhibitors of CTSL. Studies have confirmed that CTSL established by TEM following our previously described methods
andiCLhavebetteradaptationinspatialstructure,higheraffinity, with little modification63,64. Briefly, 5–10μl of each sample was
morespecificbindingandlowertoxicitythannaturalinhibitorsas dropped on a carbon support membrane, followed by dropwise
well, and are widely used in vivo experiments in cells and additionof5–10μlof1%uranylacetate.Thenthemembranewas
animals57,58. driedatroomtemperaturefortesting.TEMimageswerecollected
with a Hitachi HT7700 by Shanghai Yuyi Technology Co., Ltd
(SupplementaryFig. 2f).
Animals
C57BL/6 mice purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal
Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) were used in this study. They were Cellstimulation
maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle under standard conditions Primary microglia were treated with LPS (100ng/ml, E. coli,
ataconstanttemperature(22°C±2°C)andhumidity(50%–65%). serotype 055: B5, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) or recombinant α-Syn
Food and water provided ad libitum. All procedures involving oligomers (250nM). Cells, cell supernatants and exosomes were
animals were approved by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University collectedforanalysisofproteinexpressionandotherparameters
School of Medicine Animal Care and Use Committee and (see below).
conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of Health
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Isolationand purification ofexosomes
Publications No.8023, revised 1978). Thesupernatantsofprimarymicrogliacollectedfromeachsample
werecentrifugedat2000×gfor30mintoremovecelldebrisand
Primarycell culture deadcells(BeckmanCoulter,AllegraX-14R).Exosomeswerethen
Primary cortical neurons were prepared from C57BL/6 mouse purified from the supernatants using an exosome isolation kit
embryos on embryonic day 16–18 (E16-18). Pregnant mice were (ThermoFisher, UK, Cat# 4478359). Weadded0.5 volumesof the
sacrificedunderanaesthesiawithsevoflurane,theirembryoswere TotalExosomeIsolationreagentintotherequiredvolumeofcell-
recovered, and cerebral cortex tissues were collected from the free culture media and then mixed the culture media/reagent
embryonic brains. For neuron-enrichment, the meninges and mixture well by vortexing. After incubation at 4°C overnight,
bloodvesselswerecarefullyremoved.Thecerebralcortextissues samples were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 1.5h at 4°C. The
ofthefoetuseswereremoved,dissociatedbymildtrypsinization, supernatant was aspirated and concentrated by a Macrosep
Advance centrifugal device with a molecular weight cutoff of
and mechanically triturated in DNase solution (0.004% w/v)
1kDa (Pall Life Sciences, MI) to prepare the exosome-depleted
containing a soybean trypsin inhibitor (0.05% w/v). This mixture
fraction,andthepelletcontainingexosomesatthebottomofthe
was centrifuged for 3min at 1000rpm, the supernatant was
tube was resuspended in 150μl RIPA buffer (Beyotime Biotech-
removedandthecellpelletwasdissolvedinneurobasalmedium
nology,China)to preparetheexosome-enriched fraction.
supplemented with 1% B-27 supplement (Thermo Fisher, UK), 5
mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (PS; Thermo
Fisher, UK). The cell suspension was seeded in 10cm dishes and Exosomeidentification
12-well plates precoated with poly-D-lysine, and the plates were Atotalof5μlexosomesuspensionwasspreadonacoppergridat
culturedin95%airand5%CO at37°C.Theculturemediumwas roomtemperaturefor1min.Filterpaperwasthenusedtoremove
2
replaced every 3−4 days. Neurons were used for experiments thesuperfluousliquid.Afterwards,theexosomeswerenegatively
after7 to10days inculture. stained using 1% (w/v) sodium phosphotungstate solution at
PrimarymousemicrogliawerepreparedfromnewbornC57BL/6 room temperature for 3min, and the solution was removed with
pups(1dayold)asdescribedinapreviousarticle4.Briefly,atotal filter paper. Then, the copper grid was placed under a tungsten
of 2×107–2.3×107 cells dissociated cells isolated from pooled lamp for 10min. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
12
(DeJongInstruments,USA),isolatedandpurifiedexosomeswere Coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP)
fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde, dried, The interaction between extracellular α-Syn (oligomer and
mountedandcoatedwithgold/palladium.AFlowNanoAnalyser monomer) and P2X7R was assessed as previously described4.
(NanoFCM Co., Ltd, China) was used to determine the diameter Briefly, precleaning was performed by the addition of 50μl
andsizedistribution of theexosomes. rProteinGagarosebeads(ThermoFisher,UK)and2μganti-P2X7R,
anti-humanα-Syn,orspecies-relevantnonspecificmouseorrabbit
Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) immunoglobulin G (IgG). After 4h of rotation at 4°C, the beads
Exosome size and concentration were measured by using NTA werecentrifugedat1000×gfor3minandthenwashedwithPBS
with a ZetaView PMX 110 analyser (Particle Metrix, Meerbusch, 4 times. Primary microglia were harvested and lysed with co-IP
Germany) and ZetaView 8.04.02 software. Briefly, isolated exo- lysis buffer (20mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA,
some samples were appropriately diluted using 1x PBS buffer 10% glycerol, and 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with 1:100
(Biological Industries, Israel) to measure the particle size and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzer-
concentration. NTAwas performedat 11positions. TheZetaView land). The lysates were rotated at 4°C for 30min and cleared by
system was calibrated using 110nm polystyrene particles. The centrifugation at 12,000×g. Samples were then incubated with
temperature wasmaintainedat approximately 25°C to 26°C. antibody-conjugated beads overnight at 4°C. The proteins were
separated by SDS-PAGE (10–12%) and electrotransferred onto
PKH67labelling ofexosomesandlactate dehydrogenase polyvinylidene fluoride membranes. Western blot analysis was
(LDH)assay carriedout asdescribed above.
Purified exosomes were labelled with a PKH67 green fluorescent
labellingkit(Sigma-Aldrich,USA)accordingtothemanufacturer’s CTSL activity assay
instructions. Briefly, exosome pellets obtained from 20ml culture Weharvestedthesupernatantsofprimarymicroglia andisolated
medium were resuspended in 500ml Dilution C, mixed with exosomes in accordance with the above methods. CTSL activity
PKH67(2ml)dilutedin500mlDilutionC,andthenincubatedfor wasassessedbyusinganactivityassaykit(Abcam,UK)according
3minatroomtemperature.Anequivalentvolumeof1%BSAwas tothemanufacturer’sinstructions,andfluorometricintensitywas
added to bind the excess PKH67. Exosomes labelled with PKH67 measured in a white flat-bottom Costar 96-well plate (Corning,
were collected as mentioned above, resuspended in neurobasal Lowell,MA)usingaplatereader(AnalystTMAD96-384,Biosystems,
medium and added to neurons (cultured in 12-well plates). A USA) at an excitation wavelength of 400nm and an emission
LactateDehydrogenase(LDH)AssayKit(Abcam,UK)wasused to wavelength of 505nm. Background readings were subtracted
measureLDHlevelsinmicrogliatoevaluatecellulardamageafter fromthesamplevalues.
differenttreatments.
Immunofluorescence analysis
RNAinterference andtransfection
To assess the localisation of CTSL and exosomes, and the
P2X7RandCTSLknockdownexperimentswereperformedbyusing colocalizationbetweenα-SynoligomerandP2X7R,microgliawere
primary microglia seeded in 10cm dishes at 60%–80% confluence. seededoncoverslipsin12-wellplates,treatedwith250nMWTor
The cells were transfected with P2X7R, CTSL or control small A53T α-Syn oligomer for increasing amounts of time (0–6h),
interferingRNA(siRNA)(scramble)(GenePharma,Shanghai,China)by washedthreetimesinPBS, fixedwith4%paraformaldehyde and
using Lipofectamine™ RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Thermo permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100. After blocking with 10%
Fisher, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The siRNA normal goat serum, the cells were incubated overnight at 4°C
sequences were as follows: P2X7R siRNA: GCACAGUGAACGAG with antibodies. After that, the cells were incubated with
UAUUATT, UAAUACUCGUUCACUGUGCTT; CTSL siRNA: GGGCCU secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or 546
AUUUCUGUUGCUATT, UAGCAACAGAAAUAGGCCCTT; control siRNA
(1:500, Molecular Probes, USA). Immunostaining was examined
(scramble): UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT, ACGUGACACGUUCGG withaNikonC2+confocalmicroscopeandphotographedwitha
AGAATT.
digitalcamera (CoolSNAP EZ, Photometrics).
Western blotanalysis
Neurotoxicity assays
Microglialmediumwasharvested,desalted,andconcentratedby
Resuspended exosomes (extracted from microglia from each
a Macrosep Advance centrifugal device with a molecular weight
group)wereaddedtoprimaryneuronalculturesfor24h.Protein
cutoffof1kDa(PallLifeSciences,MI)topreparecellsupernatant
extraction and subsequent western blotting were performed as
samples.Microglialexosomeswereisolatedandpurifiedbyusing
described above. The membranes were incubated overnight at
an exosome isolation kit as described above. The protein
4°Cwithprimaryantibodiesagainstcaspase-3.Formorphological
concentration was determined by the Bradford protein assay.
analysis of neuronal damage, MAP2 immunostaining was exam-
Proteins isolated from cell supernatants, whole-cell lysates and ined under a Nikon Eclipse TE2000E fluorescence microscope. All
prepared exosomes were separated by SDS-PAGE (Millipore,
obtained images were imported into Image-ProPlus software
Billerica, MA and Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), the membranes were
version7.0(MediaCybernetics,SilverSpring,MD),toquantifythe
incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies. After
levels of MAP2 staining. The assessors were blinded to the
washing, the membranes were incubated with horseradish
experimentalgroupsduringimageacquisitionandquantification.
peroxidase-linked anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies
(1:20000, Jackson ImmunoResearch, USA) for 1.5h at room
temperature.Thebandswerevisualisedusingchemiluminescence Statistical analysis
(BIO-RADChemiDocMPImagingSystem),andthedensityofeach Thedataareexpressedasthemeanandstandarddeviationofat
band was normalised to that of the loading control band, which least three independent experiments. Analysis of the differences
wasshowedbysilverstainingusingaProteoSilverSilverStainKit between group was performed by Student’s t-test. Significance
(Sigma-Aldrich,USA).Theloadingcontrolbandwasusedtounify was indicated by a p-value<0.05. In all figures, the error bars
the loading quantity of exosome samples65. All blots were represent the standard error of the mean. For all statistical
processed inparallel and derive fromthesame experiment. analyses,measurementswere taken fromdistinct samples.
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
13
DATAAVAILABILITY 26. Barbera-Cremades,M.etal.P2X7receptorinducestumornecrosisfactor-alpha
Alldatageneratedoranalysedduringthisstudyareincludedinthispublishedarticle convertingenzymeactivationandreleasetoboostTNF-alphaproduction.Front.
(anditssupplementaryinformationfiles). Immunol.8,862(2017).
27. Xu,X.Y.etal.ExosomesderivedfromP2X7receptorgene-modifiedcellsrescue
inflammation-compromised periodontal ligament stem cells from dysfunction.
Received:22January 2022; Accepted: 9 September 2022;
StemCellsTransl.Med.9,1414–1430(2020).
28. Gu,Y.H.etal.CathepsinLacutelyaltersmicrovesselintegritywithintheneu-
rovascularunitduringfocalcerebralischemia.J.Cereb.BloodFlow.Metab.35,
1888–1900(2015).
29. McGlinchey, R. P. et al. C-terminal alpha-synuclein truncations are linked to
REFERENCES cysteinecathepsinactivityinParkinson’sdisease.J.Biol.Chem.294,9973–9984
1. Blaylock,R.L.Parkinson’sdisease:Microglial/macrophage-inducedimmunoexci- (2019).
totoxicityasacentralmechanismofneurodegeneration.Surg.Neurol.Int.8,65 30. Peintner,L.etal.LossofPKD1/polycystin-1impairslysosomalactivityinaCAPN
(2017). (calpain)-dependentmanner.Autophagy17,2384–2400(2021).
2. Bartels,T.,DeSchepper,S.&Hong,S.Microgliamodulateneurodegenerationin 31. Ustyugov,A.,Shevtsova,E.&Bachurin,S.Novelsitesofneuroprotectiveactionof
Alzheimer’sandParkinson’sdiseases.Science370,66–69(2020). Dimebon(Latrepirdine).Mol.Neurobiol.52,970–978(2015).
3. Lannes,N.,Eppler,E.,Etemad,S.,Yotovski,P.&Filgueira,L.Microgliaatcenter 32. Murphy, D. D., Rueter, S. M., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. Synucleins are
stage:acomprehensivereviewabouttheversatileanduniqueresidentialmac- developmentallyexpressed,andalpha-synucleinregulatesthesizeofthepre-
rophagesofthecentralnervoussystem.Oncotarget8,114393–114413(2017). synaptic vesicular pool in primary hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci. 20,
4. Jiang,T.etal.P2X7receptoriscriticalinalpha-synuclein–mediatedmicroglial 3214–3220(2000).
NADPHoxidaseactivation.Neurobiol.Aging36,2304–2318(2015). 33. George,J.M.Thesynucleins.GenomeBiol.3,REVIEWS3002(2002).
5. Tamhane, T. et al. Nuclear cathepsin L activity is required for cell cycle pro- 34. Catalano,M.&O’Driscoll,L.Inhibitingextracellularvesiclesformationandrelease:
gressionofcolorectalcarcinomacells.Biochimie122,208–218(2016). areviewofEVinhibitors.J.Extracell.Vesicles9,1703244(2020).
6. Li,L.etal.Parkinson’sdiseaseinvolvesautophagyandabnormaldistributionof 35. Dong,Y.etal.Theanestheticsevofluraneinducestautraffickingfromneuronsto
cathepsinL.Neurosci.Lett.489,62–67(2011). microglia.Commun.Biol.4,560(2021).
7. Xu,S.,Zhang,H.,Yang,X.,Qian,Y.&Xiao,Q.InhibitionofcathepsinLalleviates 36. Santos,J.,Pallares,I.&Ventura,S.IsacureforParkinson’sdiseasehidinginside
the microglia-mediated neuroinflammatory responses through caspase-8 and us?TrendsBiochem.Sci.47,641–644(2022).
NF-kappaBpathways.Neurobiol.Aging62,159–167(2018). 37. Pevarello,P.etal.P2X7antagonistsforCNSindications:recentpatentdisclosures.
8. Wang,P.etal.Valproatehamperspodocyteacquisitionofimmunephenotypes Pharm.Pat.Anal.6,61–76(2017).
via intercepting the GSK3beta facilitated NFkB activation. Oncotarget 8, 38. Gong,J.etal.Lentiviralvector-mediatedSHC3silencingexacerbatesoxidative
88332–88344(2017). stressinjuryinnigraldopamineneuronsbyregulatingthePI3K-AKT-FoxOsig-
9. Li,L.,Gao,L.,Song,Y.,Qin,Z.H.&Liang,Z.ActivatedcathepsinLisassociated nalingpathwayinratswithParkinson’sdisease.CellPhysiol.Biochem.49,971–984
withtheswitchfromautophagytoapoptoticdeathofSH-SY5Ycellsexposedto (2018).
6-hydroxydopamine.Biochem.Biophys.Res.Commun.470,579–585(2016). 39. Lukiw,W.J.&Pogue,A.I.VesiculartransportofencapsulatedmicroRNAbetween
10. ZhangH,L.G.,Lou,Y.,Xiao,Q.&Chen,S.ThereleaseoflysosomalPro⁃cathepsin glialandneuronalcells.Int.J.Mol.Sci.21,https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21145078
LofBV⁃2cellsuponlipopolysaccharidestimulationanditstoxicitytoneurons. (2020).
Chin.J.Contemp.Neurol.Neurosurg.11,71–75(2011). 40. Mathieu,M.,Martin-Jaular,L.,Lavieu,G.&Thery,C.Specificitiesofsecretionand
11. Tohda, C. & Tohda, M. Extracellular cathepsin L stimulates axonal growth in uptakeofexosomesandotherextracellularvesiclesforcell-to-cellcommunica-
neurons.BMCResNotes10,613(2017). tion.Nat.CellBiol.21,9–17(2019).
12. Kang, M. J., Jo, S. G., Kim, D. J. & Park, J. H. NLRP3 inflammasome mediates 41. Kam,T.I.,Hinkle,J.T.,Dawson,T.M.&Dawson,V.L.Microgliaandastrocyte
interleukin-1beta production in immune cells in response to Acinetobacter dysfunctioninparkinson’sdisease.Neurobiol.Dis.144,105028(2020).
baumannii and contributes to pulmonary inflammation in mice. Immunology 42. Lazdon,E.,Stolero,N.&Frenkel,D.MicrogliaandParkinson’sdisease:footprints
150,495–505(2017). topathology.J.NeuralTransm.(Vienna)127,149–158(2020).
13. Lopez-Castejon, G. et al. P2X(7) receptor-mediated release of cathepsins from 43. van Hinsbergh, V. W., Engelse, M. A. & Quax, P. H. Pericellular proteases in
macrophagesisacytokine-independentmechanismpotentiallyinvolvedinjoint angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 26, 716–728
diseases.J.Immunol.185,2611–2619(2010). (2006).
14. Nieto,F.R.etal.Neuron-immunemechanismscontributetopaininearlystages 44. McGlinchey, R. P., Dominah, G. A. & Lee, J. C. Taking a bite out of amyloid:
ofarthritis.J.Neuroinflammation13,96(2016). mechanisticinsightsintoalpha-synucleindegradationbycathepsinL.Biochem-
15. Joassard, O. R. et al. Regulation of Akt-mTOR, ubiquitin-proteasome and istry56,3881–3884(2017).
autophagy-lysosomepathwaysinresponsetoformoteroladministrationinrat 45. Weitoft, T. et al. Cathepsin S and cathepsin L in serum and synovial fluid in
skeletalmuscle.Int.J.Biochem.CellBiol.45,2444–2455(2013). rheumatoidarthritiswithandwithoutautoantibodies.Rheumatology(Oxf.)54,
16. Jella, K. K. et al. Exosomal GAPDH from proximal tubule cells regulate ENaC 1923–1928(2015).
activity.PLoSONE11,e0165763(2016). 46. Cwiklinski,K.etal.Theextracellularvesiclesofthehelminthpathogen,fasciola
17. Kowal,J.,Tkach,M.&Thery,C.Biogenesisandsecretionofexosomes.Curr.Opin. hepatica:biogenesispathwaysandcargomoleculesinvolvedinparasitepatho-
CellBiol.29,116–125(2014). genesis.Mol.CellProteom.14,3258–3273(2015).
18. Hessvik, N. P. & Llorente, A. Current knowledge on exosome biogenesis and 47. Ruan,Z.etal.P2RX7inhibitorsuppressesexosomesecretionanddiseasephe-
release.CellMol.LifeSci.75,193–208(2018). notypeinP301Stautransgenicmice.Mol.Neurodegener.15,47(2020).
19. Wu,B.etal.Glutaminase-containingmicrovesiclesfromHIV-1-infectedmacro- 48. Cao,F.etal.P2X7receptor:apotentialtherapeutictargetforautoimmunedis-
phages and immune-activated microglia induce neurotoxicity. Mol. Neurode- eases.Autoimmun.Rev.18,767–777(2019).
gener.10,61(2015). 49. Li, J. J. et al. In vivo evidence for the contribution of peripheral circulating
20. Grimaldi,A.etal.Microglia-derivedmicrovesiclesaffectmicrogliaphenotypein inflammatoryexosomestoneuroinflammation.J.Neuroinflammation15,8(2018).
glioma.Front.CellNeurosci.13,41(2019). 50. Guo, M. et al. Microglial exosomes facilitate alpha-synuclein transmission in
21. Chen,G.etal.ExosomalPD-L1contributestoimmunosuppressionandisasso- Parkinson’sdisease.Brain143,1476–1497(2020).
ciatedwithanti-PD-1response.Nature560,382–386(2018). 51. Banati, R. B., Rothe, G., Valet, G. & Kreutzberg, G. W. Detection of lysosomal
22. Raposo,G.&Stoorvogel,W.Extracellularvesicles:exosomes,microvesicles,and cysteine proteinases in microglia: flow cytometric measurement and histo-
friends.J.CellBiol.200,373–383(2013). chemicallocalizationofcathepsinBandL.Glia7,183–191(1993).
23. Turola,E.,Furlan,R.,Bianco,F.,Matteoli,M.&Verderio,C.Microglialmicrovesicle 52. Mehra,S.etal.Clinicalsignificanceofcathepsin Land cathepsinBindilated
secretionandintercellularsignaling.Front.Physiol.3,149(2012). cardiomyopathy.Mol.CellBiochem.428,139–147(2017).
24. Takenouchi, T. et al. Extracellular ATP induces unconventional release of 53. Bendor,J.T.,Logan,T.P.&Edwards,R.H.Thefunctionofalpha-synuclein.Neuron
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphatedehydrogenasefrommicroglialcells.Immunol.Lett. 79,1044–1066(2013).
167,116–124(2015). 54. Bokor,M., Tantos, A., Tompa, P.,Han, K. H. &Tompa, K. WT and A53T alpha-
25. Dubyak,G.R.P2X7receptorregulationofnon-classicalsecretionfromimmune synucleinsystems:meltingdiagramanditsnewinterpretation.Int.J.Mol.Sci.21,
effectorcells.CellMicrobiol.14,1697–1706(2012). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21113997(2020).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127

---PAGE BREAK---

T.Jiangetal.
14
55. Liu, J. et al. Identification of ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor alpha as a AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS
mediatorofneurotoxicityinducedbyalpha-synuclein.Proteomics10,2138–2150
Studyconceptanddesign:T.J.,J.X.andX.C.;Experimentalandtechnicalsupport:T.J.,
(2010). C.X.,S.G.,J.Zhang,J.X.;Acquisition,analysis,orinterpretationofdata:T.J.,C.X.,S.G.,
56. Liu,J.etal.Rab11aandHSP90regulaterecyclingofextracellularalpha-synuclein. D.Y.,J.Zhang,J.Zheng,X.W.,Q.L.;Draftingofthemanuscript:T.J.,Q.L.,D.Y.,J.Zheng.,
J.Neurosci.29,1480–1485(2009).
X.W.;Criticalrevisionofthemanuscriptforimportantintellectualcontent:L.C.,S.G.,
57. Yasuma,T.etal.Synthesisofpeptidealdehydederivativesasselectiveinhibitors D.Y.,J.X.,X.C.Statisticalanalysis:T.J.,C.X.,J.Zhang,L.C.;Financialsupport:T.J.,C.X.,
of human cathepsin L and their inhibitory effect on bone resorption. J. Med. S.G.,D.Y.,J.X.andX.C.Allauthorsreadandapprovedthefinalmanuscript.
Chem.41,4301–4308(1998).
58. Rebbaa, A. et al. The anti-angiogenic activity of NSITC, a specific cathepsin L
inhibitor.AnticancerRes.29,4473–4481(2009). COMPETINGINTERESTS
59. Zhang, W. et al. Aggregated alpha-synuclein activates microglia: a process
leading to disease progression in Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 19, 533–542 Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterests.
(2005).
60. Liu,J.etal.Identificationofproteinsinvolvedinmicroglialendocytosisofalpha-
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
synuclein.J.ProteomeRes.6,3614–3627(2007).
61. Zhang, W. et al. Microglial PHOX and Mac-1 are essential to the enhanced Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
dopaminergic neurodegeneration elicited by A30P and A53T mutant alpha- availableathttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-022-00394-9.
synuclein.Glia55,1178–1188(2007).
62. Gao,H.M.,Hong,J.S.,Zhang,W.&Liu,B.Synergisticdopaminergicneurotoxicity CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoDanjingYang,
ofthepesticiderotenoneandinflammogenlipopolysaccharide:relevancetothe JunXuorXuChen.
etiologyofParkinson’sdisease.J.Neurosci.23,1228–1236(2003).
63. Hu, Y. et al. Dynamic-inspired perspective on the molecular inhibitor of Tau Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
aggregationbyglucosegallatesbasedonhumanneurons.ACSChem.Neurosci. reprints
12,4162–4174(2021).
64. Sun, Y. et al. Molecular structure of an amyloid fibril formed by FUS low- Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
complexitydomain.iScience25,103701(2022). inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
65. Zhang, Y. etal.Hypothalamic stemcellscontrol ageing speed partly through
exosomalmiRNAs.Nature548,52–57(2017).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
WewouldliketothankmembersoftheShanghaigefanbiotechnologyCo.,Ltdfor
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
technicalassistance.WesincerelyappreciatethekindhelpfromDr.XiaoyuanJiain
Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
National Center for Global Health and Medicine (NCGM), Tokyo, Japan. We are materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
especially grateful to Professor Cong Liu in Interdisciplinary Research Center on
indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
BiologyandChemistry,Shanghai,ChinaandDr.ShiranLvfortherestrongsupport. article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
ThisworkissupportedbythegrantsfromtheNationalNaturalScienceFoundationof
regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
China (81801262, 81870920), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
(18ZR1428500),theNaturalScienceFoundationofJiangsuProvince(BK20180991), creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2017YFE0121100), General
Programme of Xuhui district, Shanghai (SHXH202120) and Xu Jun’s expert work
station(202005AF150050). ©TheAuthor(s)2022
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 127 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

