Review
Challenges in the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease
Eduardo Tolosa*, Alicia Garrido, Sonja W Scholz, Werner Poewe*
Parkinson’s disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and its prevalence has been projected to Lancet Neurol 2021; 20: 385–97
double over the next 30 years. An accurate diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease remains challenging and the characterisation *Joint senior authors
of the earliest stages of the disease is ongoing. Recent developments over the past 5 years include the validation of
Parkinson’s Disease and
clinical diagnostic criteria, the introduction and testing of research criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease, and the Movement Disorders Unit,
identification of genetic subtypes and a growing number of genetic variants associated with risk of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology Service, Hospital
Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Substantial progress has been made in the development of diagnostic biomarkers, and genetic and imaging tests are
Spain (Prof E Tolosa PhD,
already part of routine protocols in clinical practice, while novel tissue and fluid markers are under investigation. A Garrido MD); Centro de
Parkinson’s disease is evolving from a clinical to a biomarker-supported diagnostic entity, for which earlier identification Investigación Biomédica en
is possible, different subtypes with diverse prognosis are recognised, and novel disease-modifying treatments are Red Sobre Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas
in development.
(CIBERNED), Hospital Clínic,
IDIBAPS, Universitat de
Introduction fully manifested.8 Identification of prodromal disease is Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Parkinson’s disease is the second most common neuro­ needed, given that future disease­modifying therapies will (Prof E Tolosa, A Garrido);
Neurodegenerative Diseases
degenerative disease, with a global prevalence of more have their greatest chance for success at this stage.9,10
Research Unit, National
than 6 million individuals. This number results from Finally, there is also a need to better define Parkinson’s Institute of Neurological
a 2·5­times increase in prevalence over the past 30 years, disease subtypes,11–13 which not only have different clinical Disorders and Stroke, National
maki ng Parkinson’s disease one of the leading causes pre sentation and prognosis, but also differ in underlying Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA (S W Scholz PhD);
of neurological disability.1,2 The pathological hallmark of dis ease mechanisms, calling for person alised treatment
Department of Neurology,
Parkinson’s disease consists of neural inclusions in the approaches. The most obvious example is monogenic Johns Hopkins University
form of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, with cell loss in Parkinson’s disease, for which subtype­specific therapies Medical Center, Baltimore, MD,
the substantia nigra and other brain areas. Given that are already being tested in clinical trials.14,15 USA (S W Scholz); Department
of Neurology, Medical
aggregated and misfolded α­synuclein species are the This Review, directed towards general neurologists and
University Innsbruck,
major constituents of Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease is movement disorder specialists involved in the diag nosis Innsbruck, Austria
classified as a synucleinopathy. Braak and colleagues3 have and care of patients with Parkinson’s disease, and neuro­ (Prof W Poewe PhD)
proposed a pattern of spread of Lewy pathology, starting in scientists, describes the motor and non­motor features of Correspondence to:
the caudal brainstem and progressing rostrally through Parkinson’s disease, and delineates the issues involved in Prof Eduardo Tolosa,
Parkinson’s Disease and
the upper brainstem, limbic regions, and finally the identifying disease subtypes and the increasing role of
Movement Disorders Unit,
neocortex, but such spread probably does not occur in all genetics in their diagnosis. We will also discuss the Neurology Service, Hospital
cases. Prion­like, cell­to­cell transmission, and permissive challenges encountered when diagnosing the manifest Clínic de Barcelona,
templating of synuclein are potential mechanisms of and so­called premotor stages of the disease and critically 08036 Barcelona, Spain
eduardtolosa@gmail.com
disease progression.4 review the imaging, fluid, and tissue biomarkers that best
Age is the most important risk factor for developing support the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinson’s disease, and men are more susceptible than
women, with a prevalence ratio of approximately 3:2. A More than a movement disorder
strong genetic component to disease risk has been identi­ The clinical hallmark of Parkinson’s disease is a motor
fied, with more than 90 associated loci.5 Addition ally, syndrome characterised by bradykinesia, rest tremor, and
several potential modifiable environmental (eg, pestic ides, rigidity, in addition to changes in posture and gait. The
water pollutants) and other factors (eg, smoking, coffee, motor disturbances cause progressive disability, with
exercise, or head trauma)1 have been found to play a role impairment in activities of daily living and reduced quality
in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease in different of life. Although the classic motor symptoms occur early
populations. Although these advances in our under­ and are the pillars of diagnostic criteria, the develop ment
standing of pathogenesis and epidemiology have been of postural instability and increasing gait difficulties, as
substantial,6,7 the cause of Parkinson’s disease remains well as dysphagia and dysarthria, drive the progression of
enigmatic, and no cure or preventive therapy has yet motor disability.16
been found. Parkinson’s disease is considered a movement disorder,
Clinical diagnostic criteria, designed to enhance the but is associated with a variety of non­motor symptoms in
diagnostic accuracy of Parkinson’s disease, have been virtually all patients, including hyposmia, constipation,
validated over the past 5 years. However, diagnosis remains urinary dysfunction, orthostatic hypotension, memory
a challenge because clinical features can overlap with those loss, depression, pain, and sleep disturbances (panel 1).
of other neurodegenerative conditions, and tests or bio­ The classic motor signs of Parkinson’s disease are linked
markers do not allow for a definitive diagnosis from the to nigral degeneration and striatal dopamine depletion,
earliest stages. As a result, clinical diagnostic accuracy whereas non­motor symptoms are probably associated
remains sub optimal, even when the disease is clinically with neurodegeneration of other structures, including the
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 385

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Panel 1: Motor and non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
Motor features occurring at early stages Balance alterations
These features are considered the so-called classic or cardinal Unsteadiness when standing and walking. Altered postural
motor features of the disease. reflexes (tested with the pull test), and falls.
Bradykinesia Other
General slowness and paucity of spontaneous movement; Dysarthria and dysphagia.
decreased arm swing, reduced facial expression, reduced
Non-motor features present at early stages
gesticulation, micrographia, difficulties turning in bed,
These are not uncommon at the time of diagnosis and can
and hypophonia. Progressive reduction in speed and
precede the onset of motor features.
amplitude of voluntary repetitive movement (finger taps,
hand grips, pronation–supination movements, toe taps, Hyposmia
and heel stamps). Smell loss is reported by up to 70% of patients, and when
formally tested, presents in almost 90% of patients. Frequent
Rigidity
For more on The University of smell tests used are The University of Pennsylvania Smell
Increased muscular tone by a resistance of passive movements
Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test and the Sniffin Sticks test.
Identification Test see of equal degree in opposing muscle groups (so-called lead-pipe
https://sensonics.com/product/ type). When the increased muscle tone is interrupted by a Sleep disorders
smell-identification-test/ co-existing tremor, a ratchet-like quality of resistance, named Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder is a parasomnia
cog-wheel rigidity, is felt. characterised clinically by vivid, generally unpleasant dreams
(eg, being attacked or robbed) and vigorous behaviours in which
Tremor
the patients seem to be enacting their dreams (eg, punching,
Rest tremor (4–6 Hz) is common in limbs (so-called pill-rolling
shouting, laughing). Additionally, sleep signs and symptoms can
in hands), lips, chin, or jaw, and rarely in the head. Amplitude
include insomnia, periodic limb movements, restless leg
diminishes or is abolished during goal-directed voluntary
syndrome, akathisia, and excessive daytime sleepiness.
movements; hand rest tremors are examined with hands in a
relaxed position and arms supported—for example, hands Neuropsychiatric features
folded into the lap while sitting, and forearms in pronation Prominent apathy; anxiety (generalised anxiety, panic attacks,
(not supination). Low amplitude hand action tremor is also and social phobias); and depression (usually mild and
common at presentation. associated to anhedonia and apathy)
Gait alterations Autonomic dysfunction
Decreased arm swing, dragging one leg, and slightly bent Constipation, delayed gastric emptying, urinary urgency or
posture while walking. incontinence, erectile dysfunction, orthostatic hypotension,
and heat intolerance.
Motor features present at later stages
Mild cognitive impairment
These motor features generally occur in addition to earlier ones
Mild cognitive decline in executive and attention domains.
and respond poorly to dopaminergic treatment.
Pain and somatosensory disturbances
Posture alterations
Pain, paraesthesias, and burning sensations.
Trunk bent forward when standing. Lateral (so-called Pisa
syndrome) or anterior (camptocormia) deviation of trunk, Non motor features present at later stages
or head flexion (so-called dropped head). Arms abducted, flexed Early non motor features frequently persist and worsen at
at elbow. Flexed wrist and metacarpophalangeal joints, this stage.
and extended hand fingers and thumb.
Dementia
Freezing of gait About 30% of patients develop dementia, affecting visual
Sudden and brief episode of inability to produce effective spatial recognition and construction, and semantic and
forward stepping at initiation of gait (so-called start episodic memory. Prevalence increases with disease duration.
hesitation), during gait (motor block), or when turning or Frequently associated with hallucinations and psychosis.
approaching narrow spaces. Festination occurs when patients
are compelled to accelerate the gait forward.
peripheral autonomic nervous system.17,18 Non­motor cost of care.21 In particular, cognitive decline and halluci­
symptoms are frequent at early stages and, although nations are common causes of admission to hospital and
intense and disturbing for some patients, observ a tional institutionalisation in advanced stages of the disease.22
studies indicate that they are mild in most cases,19,20
increasing in severity with disease duration.19 As the dis­ The prodromal stage
ease progresses, non­motor symptoms cause an increased Several non­motor symptoms associated with Parkinson’s
burden, reduce quality of life, and are a driver of the overall disease, such as smell loss or constipation, are commonly
386 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Prediagnostic Parkinson’s disease Manifest Parkinson’s disease
Preclinical Prodromal Early stage Late stage
–15 –10 –5 –2
Preclinical Prodromal Manifest
• No signs or symptoms • Unspecific symptoms • Difficulty differentiating parkinsonism vs pseudo-parkinsonism at
• No available biomarkers • No specific or sensitive biomarkers; candidate very early stages
• Genetic testing and counselling biomarkers of ongoing neurodegeneration only • Clinical overlap between Parkinson’s disease and atypical
available • Overlap between prodromal and very early parkinsonsims (particularly at early stage with progressive
• Possibility of identification and manifest Parkinson’s disease (difficulty supranuclear palsy-P and multiple system atrophy-P)
modification of environmental establishing phenoconversion) • No specific or sensitive diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers exist
risk factors • Possibility for early disease-modifying therapies biomarkers, but ancillary tests can help with diagnosis
Figure: The natural history of Parkinson’s disease and diagnostic challenges by disease stage
RBD=REM sleep behavior disorder. Progressive supranuclear palsy-P=progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant parkinsonism. Multiple system
atrophy-P=multiple system atrophy with predominant parkinsonism. The time of diagnosis is represented in the axis as time “0”. The timepoints on the left side
of diagnosis represent the number of years before diagnosis, and the timepoints on the right represent the years after diagnosis. These periods of time are
orientative. The dotted arrow indicates that the duration of the preclinical phase is unknown, unlike the prodromal phase, which can extend between
10 and 15 years.
reported by patients before the onset of classic motor disease remain to be clarified, such as the sequence in
symptoms—sometimes preceding the occurrence of which prodromal symptoms develop and the speed of
motor features by years or even decades.23 The period disease progression.26 Prodromal features can also vary
when these symptoms arise has been conceptualised as depending on etiology (eg, idiopathic vs monogenic
the prodromal phase of Parkinson’s disease, correspond­ Parkinson’s disease).27 In addition to non­motor symptoms,
ing to a stage of disease when neurod egenerative changes subtle motor signs such as decreased facial mobility, voice
involve extranigral sites, such as the lower brainstem, the changes, loss of finger dexterity, a mildly stooped posture,
olfactory bulb and tracts, and the peripheral autonomic or decreased arm swing when walking might also ante­
nervous system (Braak stages 1–3).3 Similar to Alzheimer’s date the evolution of definit ive motor symptoms. However,
disease, an even earlier period when future patients are such mild parkinsonian signs might be difficult to dis­
still free of any symptoms, but disease­specific pathology tinguish from unspecific mobility changes associated with
is assumed to be present and there is biomarker evidence normal ageing.28
of disease, has also been postulated for Parkinson’s
disease (termed preclinical Parkinson’s disease; figure).24 Disease subtypes
The evidence that some non­motor symptoms are Parkinson’s disease is strikingly heterogeneous regarding
markers of a prodromal phase of Parkinson’s disease is the age of onset, clinical presentation, rate of progres­
based on retros pective assessments as well as prospective sion, and treatment response. Several clinical subtypes
epid emiological and observational studies,23,25 and is most have been proposed. Additionally, the discovery of genet­
compelling for constipation, smell loss, and rapid eye ically defined forms of the disease, which can differ from
movement­sleep behaviour disorder. Additionally, urinary sporadic forms in a number of clinical variables, have
urgency, sexual dysf unc tion, hypotension, anxiety, depres­ challenged the unitarian view of Parkinson’s disease and
sion, colour vision impairments, and dysexecutive syn­ introduced a biological definition of subentities within the
drome have also been described to antedate the onset of Parkinson’s disease spectrum.
motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (figure).19,23,25 Approaches towards subtyping Parkinson’s disease have
Important issues about the prodromal phase of Parkinson’s either used empirical assessments of individual clinical
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 387
ytilibasiD
Dementia and
Axial symptoms psychosis
Falls
Levadopa-induced
Full complications
parkinsonian
Tremor or mild syndrome
Hyposmia slowness
RBD Depression Memory complaints
Constipation Urinary dysfunction
Diagnosis
0 5 10 15
Time (years)

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
features or the more objective and hypothesis­free genotyping technology, and their successful application
methodology of hierarchical cluster analysis and other to ever­larger cohorts. International efforts have revealed
forms of machine learning.12,13,29 Clinical features that have that the genetic architecture of Parkinson’s disease is
been used for subtyping with either approach included highly complex, with both comm on and rare risk variants
age at onset (early­onset vs late­onset), prevailing motor cont ributing to pathogenesis.5 Mutations in at least
phenotype (tremor­dominant vs non­tremor cases), motor 20 genes are recognised as causes of familial parkin­
complications in response to levodopa treatment, non­ sonism, each providing a snapshot into the molecular
motor features (particularly autonomic dysfunction, basis of the neurodegenerative process. Notably, more
cognit ive dysfunction, and REM sleep behavior disorder than 90 genetic risk loci for the more common sporadic
[RBD]), as well as their rate of progression. form of the disease have been identified.38 Although
Empirically defined subtypes include young­onset unravelling the precise biology disrupted by these variants
Parkinson’s disease or early­onset Parkinson’s disease, is challenging, the disease­associated genes begin to
usually defined by age at onset cutoffs younger than coalesce into comm on pathways, including dysregulation
40 or 50 years and characterised by slower progres­ of mitochondrial homoeos tasis and impaired processes
sion, preserved cognition, and increased risk to develop related to cell death machinery, inflamm atory signal­
motor complications in response to levodopa.30,31 Benign­ ling, intracellular trafficki ng, and endosomal­lysosomal
tremulous Parkinson’s disease or tremor­dominant dysfunction.39
Parkinson’s disease are two terms that have been used to Genetic testing for Mendelian forms of Parkinson’s
describe the clinical predominance of rest tremor over disease is increasingly done in clinical practice, and should
other motor symptoms32 and this clinical subtype has be considered in patients with early onset of disease
been associated with slower progression and less cogni­ (defined as onset before age 40 years), patients with a
tive decline than other clinical presentations.31–33 Clinical family history, and individuals from high­risk populations
presentations with prominent postural instability and gait with a high prevalence of specific monogenic forms of
disorder have been classified as a postural instability and disease (eg, Ashkenazi Jewish, North African Berber
gait disturbances subtype, characterised by a rapid decline Arabs).40 Knowledge of the underlying gene defect within a
of motor function as well as cognition.33 Problems with family enables more effective counsell ing and allows for
empirically defined subtypes include the fact that patients predictive testing within asymptom atic family members.
initially presenting with tremulous or non­tremulous Increasingly, clinical trials are targeting specific genetic
Parkinson’s disease motor signs can change categories forms of neurodegeneration, and the identification of the
with longer follow­up.33,34 causative gene can provide opportunities for the patient to
Recent cluster analyses have included non­motor participate in such studies.
features,35 and in one of these studies, mild cognitive Genetic information is refining our fundamental
impairment, RBD, and orthostatic hypotension at baseline understand ing of the clinical entity known as Parkinson’s
identified the most rapidly progressive subtype,36 which disease. An early lesson learned from studying monogenic
was termed diffuse malignant because of the most severe patients is that Parkinson’s disease is phenotypically
expression of both motor and non­motor features. The diverse, and there is more substantial overlap with
slowest progression was seen in patients presenting atypical parkinsonism than previously known. For
with predominant motor features of mild severity (mild example, patients harboring a disease­causing mutation
motor­predominant), with a third subtype being termed in the LRRK2 gene can manifest with protean clinical
intermediate (between the two).36 presenta tions that include typical levodopa responsive
The ultimate proof for the validity of clinically defined Parkinson’s disease in the majority of cases, progressive
disease subtypes should come from objective biological supranuclear palsy, and occasionally amyotrophy.15,41,42
measures or biomarkers, showing that such sub­entities Similarly, patients with mutations in the genes GBA,
reflect differences in underlying disease mechanisms SNCA, or VPS13C can present with typical Parkinson’s
or pathology.29 However, a brain bank study in which disease, but more commonly develop progressive cogni­
111 patients had been retrospectively classified into mild tive impairment consistent with Lewy body dementia.43–45
motor­predominant, intermediate, and diffuse malignant Although these observations only relate to 5–40% of
subtypes found no group differences in Lewy pathology Parkinson’s dis ease cases (depending on ethnic back­
and Alzheimer’s­related pathology.37 Only genetic sub­ ground), these find ings provide crucial insights into the
typing of Parkinson’s disease has established biological central pathways associated with parkinsonism, and
underpinnings. empha sise potential targets for disease­modifying inter­
ven tions. Although monogenic Parkinson’s disease
Lessons from genetics cases are increas ingly defined on a molecular basis (eg,
The advent of the genomics era has led to rapid advances PARK­LRRK2, PARK­SNCA), only PARK­LRRK2 and
in our understanding of the genetic causes and risk PARK­Parkin are relatively common in clinical prac tice,
variants of Parkinson’s disease. These discoveries have as is Parkinson’s disease associated with high­risk vari­
been driven by improvem ents in sequencing and ants in GBA41 (table 1).
388 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Mutations Inheritance Clinical phenotype relative to classic Parkinson’s disease Frequency
Age at onset Clinical features Progression
Classic parkinsonism
PARK-SNCA Missense (PARK 1); Autosomal Younger Similar, prominent Faster Rare
(PARK 1, PARK 4) duplication or dominant non-motor symptoms,
triplication (PARK 4) and early dementia
PARK-LRRK2 Missense Autosomal Similar Similar (lower prevalence Similar Common in Ashkenazi Jews,
(PARK 8) dominant of rapid eye movement Basque population (Spain),
sleep behavior disorder) and North African Berbers
PARK-VPS35 Missense Autosomal Similar Similar Similar Rare
(PARK 17) dominant
PARK-CHCHD2 Missense, splice site, Autosomal Similar Similar Similar Rare and controversial subtype,
(PARK 22) nonsense dominant most often described in Asian
patients
Early-onset parkinsonism
PARK-Parkin Missense, loss-of- Autosomal Younger Common early leg Slower Common (accounts for up to 20% of
(PARK 2) function, exonic recessive involvement and cases with onset before age 50 years;
duplication, deletion dystonia at onset, and dementia uncommon)
frequent dyskinesia
PARK-PINK1 Missense, loss-of- Autosomal Younger Similar to PARK-Parkin, Slower Second most common recessive
(PARK 6) function, exonic recessive with common psychiatric Parkinson’s disease subtype after
deletion, duplication features PARK-Parkin; dementia uncommon
PARK-DJ1 Missense, loss-of- Autosomal Younger Similar to PARK-Parkin, Slower Rare; dementia uncommon
(PARK 7) function, small recessive with psychiatric
duplications or deletions symptoms
High-risk gene
GBA Missense, splice site, Risk gene Younger Similar to sporadic Faster Very common (5–25% of patients),
loss-of-function, small Parkinson’s disease, but particularly in Ashkenazi Jews
insertions or deletions greater dementia risk
Table 1: Monogenic subtypes of Parkinson’s disease
Diagnostic challenges and pitfalls by glial cytoplasmic inclusions of misfolded α­synuclein in
Making a diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease can oligodendrocytes, as well as the tauopathies progressive
be a straightforward clinical exercise in cases with a classic supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration, defined
history, typical asymmetric motor signs, no atypical by neuronal deposition of four­repeat phosphorylated tau
features, and exclusion of alternative causes. aggregates.49,50 At early stages of the disease, all three
However, in routine clinical practice diagnostic mis­ conditions can be very difficult to distinguish from
classification is common, with error rates ranging from Parkinson’s disease, as well as from each other. Clinico­
15% to 24% in different series.8,46,47 A recent meta­analysis pathological studies have revealed error rates in clinical
found a pooled diagnostic accuracy for the clinical diagnosis in 7–35% of cases.51–53
diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease of only 80·6% across Clinical pointers that can inform the differential
11 clinico­pathological studies.48 Even with the use of diagnosis between Parkinson’s disease and these main
stringent clinical diagnostic criteria, 10% of people diag­ types of atypical degenerative parkinsonism are sum­
nosed with Parkinson’s disease by neurologists had marised in panel 2. These differentiating feat ures can
alterna tive pathologies. Common misdiagnoses in clinical evolve over time and, particularly the parkinsonian variants
practice include non­Parkinson’s disease tremor disorders, of multiple system atrophy and progressive supranuclear
such as essen tial tremor, as well as different types of palsy, can be notoriously difficult to distinguish from
secondary parkinsonism (table 2). Parkinson’s disease in early disease stages—including
The greatest challenge, even for movement disorder asymmetry (which is particularly striki ng in corticobasal
specialists, is early diagnostic differentiation of Parkinson’s degeneration) and responsiveness to levodopa.
disease from atypical parkinsonian disorders. Atypical
parkinsonism is an umbrella term for a variety of Clinical diagnostic criteria
neurodegenerative disorders in which a parkinsonian To enhance diagnostic accuracy of Parkinson’s disease, the
syndrome is a prominent clinical feature, but the full International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society
clinical spectrum, underlying pathology, progression, and has proposed a set of criteria that represent a revised
prognosis fundamentally differ from those of Parkinson’s version of the Queen’s Square Brain Bank Criteria that
disease. The atypical parkinsonism syndromes include have been the most commonly used over the past
multiple system atrophy, which is pathologically defined decades.54,55 These criteria rest on the expert neurological
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 389

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Mechanism Differential clinical features vs Diagnosis Therapy
Parkinson’s disease
Drug-induced* Interference with dopamine Often symmetric, with perioral Consistent history of exposure; Discontinue the causative
signalling tremor, and co-existent tardive normal dopamine transporter- drug; temporary use of
syndromes SPECT anti-Parkinson’s disease drugs
Vascular Disruption of striato-pallido- Acute or subacute onset (not Strategic infarcts and Trial of levadopa;
thalamo-cortical motor obligatory); often presenting subcortical microvascular physiotherapy; occupational
network with gait disorder (lower body lesions on MRI, and normal therapy
parkinsonism) dopamine transporter-SPECT
(not obligatory)
Toxic (copper, Basal ganglia lesions (putamen, Symmetric parkinsonism; History of exposure; Trial of levadopa;
manganese) pallidum) co-existent dystonia; severe MRI findings physiotherapy; speech
dysarthria, so-called cock-gait therapy; occupational therapy
(manganese)
Infectious Basal ganglia abscesses or Additional movement disorders Medical history; systemic signs; Treatment of underlying
granuloma (toxoplasmosis, and other neurological signs are MRI findings; CSF analysis; conditions; trial of levadopa
cryptococcosis, tuberculosis); common specific serologies
encephalitic (HIV,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,
progressive multifocal
leuko-encephalopathy) or
postencephalitic basal ganglia
involvement
Autoimmune Anti-neuronal antibodies Additional movement disorders Antibody detection; search for Immunotherapy (intravenous
affecting basal ganglia motor and other neurological signs associated neoplasms immunoglobulin,
circuits (eg, D2R, DPPX, common plasmapheresis,
NMDAR, IgLON5, and Ma2/Ta immunosuppressants);
antibodies) treatment of associated
tumour
Neoplastic Invasion or indirect Additional focal neurological MRI Treatment of underlying
compressive effects signs conditions; trial of levadopa
(frontal meningioma) of basal
ganglia circuitry
Metabolic Basal ganglia involvement Additional movement disorders Specific laboratory and Treatment of underlying
(eg, Wilson’s disease, and other neurological, imaging studies conditions; trial of levadopa
non-ketotic hyperglycaemia, psychiatric, and systemic
extrapontine myelinolysis, signs are common
calcium dyshomoeostasis,
hypermagnesemia in liver
disease, iron deposition
in NBIA)
Normal pressure Compromised prefrontal Small step and broad-based gait Neuroimaging (brain CT or MRI) Cerebrospinal fluid drainage
hydrocephalus motor connectivity disorder with freezing, no rest (repeated lumbar puncture,
tremor, or upper limb ventricular shunting)
involvement (lower body
parkinsonism)
Functional Multifactorial, includes Abrupt onset; spontaneous History of psychiatric Counselling; cognitive
psychiatric comorbidity and fluctuation; effortful comorbidity; incongruent behavioural therapy
impaired self-agency demonstrative slowness; tremor clinical presentation; remission
with frequency variation and with behavioural or
entrainment; no response psychotherapy
to levodopa
NBIA=neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. SPECT=single-photon emission computed tomography. *Most common causative drugs: dopamine receptor blockers,
including first generation (phenothiazines and butyrophenones) and second generation (eg, olanzapine, risperidone, sulpiride, aripiprazole) antipsychotics, as well as antiemetics
(metoclopramide, prochlorperazine, and triflupromazine); dopamine-depleting drugs (tetrabenazine or reserpine); calcium channel antagonists (flunarizine, cinnarizine,
and verapamil); antiepileptics (valproate, carbamazepine, or lamotrigine); antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, combined noradrenergic-serotonergic
reuptake inhibitors, and antimuscarinics).
Table 2: Secondary parkinsonisms
examination showing parkinsonian syndrome defined by Movement Disorder Society criteria list a number of
the presence of bradykinesia and at least one additional non­exclusionary clinical features that are unusual in
cardinal motor feature (rigidity or classic asymmetric 5­Hz Parkinson’s disease and should raise suspicion of potential
resting tremor), plus the application of supportive and alternative diagnoses (so­called red flags). On the basis of
exclusionary features. By contrast to the Queen’s Square the presence of supportive and absence of exclusionary
Brain Bank criteria, the International Parkinson and features, as well as the presence or absence of red flags, the
390 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Movement Disorder Society criteria operationalise two
Panel 2: Clinical diagnostic pointers for atypical
levels of diagnostic certainty for Parkinson’s disease,
parkinsonism
namely clinically established and clinically probable. The
first category establishes a set of criteria aimed to maximise Multiple system atrophy
specificity at the possible expense of sensitivity, while • Poor response to levadopa (initial responsiveness to
criteria for the second level aim for enhanced sensitivity levadopa in about 30% of cases)
(appendix). • Severe and early autonomic failure (orthostatic See Online for appendix
A validation study of the Movement Disorder Society hypotension, erectile dysfunction, post-void residual
criteria has shown excellent sensitivity (96%) and volume >100 mL) in the first 5 years of disease
specifi city (95%) for a diagnosis of clinically probable • Nocturnal stridor
Parkinson’s disease. The specificity of a diagnosis of • Early marked dysarthria
clinically established Parkinson’s disease was even higher • Rapid disease progression
(98·5%), but—as anticipated—this was at the expense • Early postural instability
of reduced sensi tivity (59·3%). For patients with • Babinski sign or other pyramidal signs
a disease duration of less than 5 years, the specificity of a • Cerebellar signs
clinically probable Parkinson’s disease diagnosis was 87%.56 • Jerky postural hand tremor (minipolymyoclonus)
The International Parkinson and Movement Disorder • Disproportionate antecollis (so-called dropped head)
Society criteria incor porate two ancillary tests among the • Orofacial dystonia induced by levodopa
four supportive diagnostic criteria, but future diagnostic
Progressive supranuclear palsy
algorithms will need to incorporate additional tests and
• Akinetic rigid parkinsonism with poor levadopa response
biomarkers to further enhance diagnostic accuracy and
• Slowing of vertical saccades
sensitivity for early and prodromal disease stages.
• Supranuclear downgaze palsy (often not present in the
Progress towards early diagnosis first year of onset)
• Square wave jerks
There is consensus that the process leading to clinically
• Levator inhibition
defined Parkinson’s disease starts much earlier than can
• Blepharospasm
be captured by current diagnostic criteria (figure). To
• Pseudobulbar crying
date, no biomarkers have been identified that would
• Early dysarthria and dysphagia
enable a confident diagnosis of any of these conceptual
• Early postural instability and falls
phases of pre­diagnostic Parkinson’s disease with high
• Early progressive gait freezing
sensitivity and specificity. This is particularly problematic
• Early marked frontal dementia
when it comes to the prognosis of individuals who
present with one or more features associated with an Corticobasal degeneration
increased risk of developing clinically defined Parkinson’s • Levadopa-resistant unilateral akinetic parkinsonism
disease, such as a positive family history or asymptomatic • Cortical sensory loss (ie, agraphesthesia, astereognosia
carrier status for disease­associated mutations plus with intact primary sensory modalities)
non­motor features of prodromal Parkinson’s disease like • Limb apraxia, alien limb phenomenon
hyposmia or RBD. • Focal arm myoclonus or dystonia
In a research setting, identifying individuals at risk for • Early cognitive impairment with frontal signs and
Parkinson’s disease is important to understand disease language problems (ie, progressive, non-fluent aphasia)
progression and to recruit participants for clinical trials of • Early postural instability and falls
disease­modifying therapies.26 Several cross­sectional and
prospective case­control studies have attempted to define
the predictive value of prodromal clinical, non­genetic, and The International Parkinson and Movement Disorder
genetic risk factors, and neuroimaging tests, to deter­ Society has proposed criteria for a research diagnosis of
mine the probability of conversion to clinically manifest prodromal Parkinson’s disease. These attempts provide
Parkinson’s disease.23,25,28 RBD stands out among the an evidence­based framework to statistically estimate the
clinical markers of Parkinson’s disease risk in that more likelihood for future Parkinson’s disease at an individual
than 90% of individuals with isolated RBD will eventually level on the basis of a large set of well­characterised
develop neurodegenerative parkinsonism—most com­ markers of risk.60,61 Prospective cohort­studies have
monly Parkinson’s disease or Parkinson’s disease demen­ provided evidence for the validity of these criteria in
tia.57,58 The latent period from RBD onset to the development population­based cohorts.62,63 A similar algorithm has
of Parkinson’s disease is variable and usually more than been developed in the format of an online tool to assess
10 years,57 although the presence of olfactory dysfunction, Parkinson’s disease risk and has been tested and validated
abnormalities on dopamine­transporter SPECT, or trans­ in the PREDICT­Parkinson’s disease study, a prospective
cranial sonography have been shown to identify those community­based population study involving more than
patients close to clinical conversion.58,59 1000 participants.64,65
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 391

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Panel 3: Useful diagnostic tests in patients presenting with parkinsonism
UPSIT and Sniffin Sticks for olfactory function • Normal: excludes Parkinson’s disease or other degenerative
• Normosmia: questions a Parkinson’s disease diagnosis parkinsonism
• Hyposmia: consistent with Parkinson’s disease
Meta-iodobenzylguanidine-SPECT
Imaging • Reduced cardiac meta-iodobenzylguanidine uptake:
Structural MRI consistent with Parkinson’s disease (inconclusive in
• Normal or signs of unrelated co-morbidity: consistent with early disease)
Parkinson’s disease • Normal: suggestive of non-Parkinson’s disease parkinsonism
• Structural basal ganglia pathology (eg, infarcts, (inconclusive in early disease) or secondary parkinsonism
haematoma, abscess, calcification, iron deposition), frontal Fluorodeoxyglucose PET
meningioma, normal pressure hydrocephalus: secondary • Putamenal hypermetabolism (plus occipital and parietal
parkinsonism hypometabolism): consistent with Parkinson’s disease
• Putamenal atrophy and hypointensity, putamenal rim sign, • Putamenal and cerebellar hypometabolism: consistent with
pontocerebellar atrophy, middle cerebellar peduncle atrophy, multiple system atrophy
hot cross bun sign: suggestive of multiple system atrophy • Frontal, caudate, and brainstem hypometabolism:
• Midbrain atrophy (hummingbird sign), dilated third consistent with progressive supranuclear palsy
ventricle, superior cerebellar peduncle atrophy: suggestive • Asymmetric striatal and parietal hypometabolism:
of progressive supranuclear palsy consistent with corticobasal degeneration
• Asymmetric parietal cortical atrophy: suggestive of
Transcranial ultrasound
corticobasal degeneration
• Midbrain hyperechogenicity and basal ganglia
Diffusion-weighted-MRI normoechogenicity: consistent with Parkinson’s disease
• Normal: consistent with Parkinson’s disease • Midbrain normoechogenicity and basal ganglia
• Increased putamenal diffusivity: suggestive of multiple hyperechogenicity: might be suggestive of non-Parkinson’s
system atrophy (can also be seen in progressive disease parkinsonism
supranuclear palsy)
Genetic testing
• Increased diffusivity in middle cerebellar peduncle:
• Pathogenic mutation in known Parkinson’s disease gene:
suggestive of progressive supranuclear palsy
confirms genetic Parkinson’s disease
Dopamine transporter-SPECT
• Absence of a pathogenic mutation in known Parkinson’s
• Abnormal (asymmetric reduction of striatal tracer binding):
disease genes: does not rule out Parkinson’s disease
consistent with Parkinson’s’ disease or other degenerative
parkinsonism
Although current research algorithms might provide the rule in the early stages of atypical degenerative or
an opportunity for earlier detection of Parkinson’s dis­ second ary parkinsonisms.66 The International Parkinson
ease than is currently possible in clinical practice, their and Movement Disorder Society criteria for Parkinson’s
sensitivities and predictive values are still suboptimal, and disease lists hyposmia as one of four supportive criteria of
sensitive and reliable Parkinson’s disease biomarkers are a Parkinson’s disease diagnosis, and although in their
urgently required. validation study56 the olfactory testing only achieved
63·4% specificity, this feature has shown high diagnostic
Diagnostic testing—from clinical routine to future accuracy for distinguishing Parkinson’s disease from
biomarkers mult iple system atrophy and progressive supran uclear
Nowadays, clinicians must rely on the judicious use of a palsy in other studies.67 Given the low cost and easy
limited number of diagnostic tests to solidify a clinical applicability, olfactory testing should be part of the initial
diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. Their use follows prin­ clinical testing of people with suspected Parkinson’s
ciples of cost­effectiveness, and diagnostic yield is context disease.
dependent. We summarise broadly available ancillary
tests that have been established to support Parkinson’s Imaging markers
disease or an alternative diagnosis (panel 3). Structural MRI is usually unremarkable in patients with
Olfactory function testing using The University of Parkinson’s disease. Nonetheless, it should also be part of
Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test or Sniffin Stick the routine diagnostic process to distinguish Parkinson’s
tests has been extensively studied in Parkinson’s disease disease from secondary or atypical parkinsonian syn­
and other parkinsonian syndromes. Hyposmia or dromes (panel 3) because several MRI features are highly
anosmia have been consistent findings in about 90% of specific for atypical parkinsonisms, although sensitivity is
patients with Parkinson’s disease, while normosmia is low (at about 50%).
392 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Novel MRI techniques, including neurom elanin imaging index or the caudate to putamen binding ratio; however,
(NMI), quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM), or these have not proved to be useful in clinical practice,
visual assessment of dorsal nigral hyperintensity, have the and DAT­SPECT should not be considered a tool for
potential to assess nigral pathology and have been a major the differential diagnosis between neurodegenerat ive
focus of research efforts. NMI exploits the paramagnetic parkinson isms.83 Although dopamin er gic radiotracer
properties of neuromelanin, while QSM enables quanti­ imagi ng using DAT­SPECT or metabolic imaging with
fication of iron deposition in the substantia nigra.68,69 fluorod eoxyglucose­PET have shown sensitivity for pro­
NMI has shown greater than 80% sensitivity and specificity dromal stages of Parkinson’s disease,58,84 there is reason to
to distinguish Parkinson’s disease from healthy controls70 expect that sensitive and specific radiotracer probes
and could have the potential to show alterations in enabling visualisation and quantification of α­synuclein
prodromal Parkinson’s disease.71 QSM assessments of deposits in the brain or peripheral autonomic nervous
increased iron content in the substantia nigra have shown system via PET or SPECT imaging might substantially
a broadly similar performance in separating Parkinson’s enhance early or even pre­clinical diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease from healthy controls.72,73 Visual assessment of an disease and other synucleinopathies. Several candidates
area of dorsal nigral hyperintensity, which has been are in preclinical development, but none has yet reached
postulated to correspond to nigrosome­1 and is lost in the stage of clinical diagnostic testing.85
Parkinson’s disease, has shown a pooled sensitivity of 98%
and a pooled specificity of 95% in distinguishing Fluid and tissue α-synuclein markers
Parkinson’s disease from healthy controls in a meta­ Pathological α­synuclein species are candidates in the
analysis of ten case­control studies, including 364 patients search for sensitive and specific biomarkers. A variety of
with Parkinson’s disease and 231 controls,74 and has also biopsy studies have suggested that immunohistoc hemical
been suggested as a potential MRI biomarker in prodromal assessm ent for the presence of phosphorylated and
Parkinson’s disease.75 aggregated α­synuclein in the enteric nervous system, and
Although these novel MRI techniques could hold autonomic nerve fibres in the salivary glands or skin can
potential as biomarkers of early or even prodromal distinguish patients with Parkinson’s disease from healthy
Parkinson’s disease, they generally cannot distinguish controls and, more importantly, might serve as a biomarker
between Parkinson’s disease and other types of degenera­ for prodromal disease stages.86–88
tive parkinsonism, since nigral pathology is common to The availability of in vitro conversion assays with ultra­
all. This is different for a variety of novel MR diffusion high sensitivity for amyloidogenic proteins like Real­Time
tensor imaging techniques, such as free water imaging Quaking Induced Conversion (RT­QuIC) and Protein
and neurite orientation dispersion, and density imaging, Misfolding Cyclic Amplification (PMCA) has substantially
which enable differentiation between Parkinson’s disease effected the search for molecular biomarkers. A number
and atypical parkinsonism on the basis of more wide­ of case­control studies have found sensitivities and
spread tissue integrity changes in patients with multiple specificities of RT­QuIC or PMCA analyses of α­synuclein
system atrophy or progressive supranuclear palsy.76,77 seeding activity in the CSF of more than 90% to distinguish
Some studies have also suggested high discriminative Parkinson’s disease from healthy controls or patients with
accuracy between Parkinson’s disease and multiple tauopathies.89–92 High sensitivities and specificities have
system atrophy and progres sive supranuclear palsy by use been shown for RT­QuIC or PMCA analyses of skin
of observer­independent machine learning approaches biopsies.93 Addit ionally, α­synuclein seeding activity has
with autom ated volumetry or automated voxel­based also been found by use of RT­QuIC in the CSF of
diffusivity,78,79 or multimodal MRI combining several MR non­manifesting carriers of a LRRK2 mutation94 and in the
parameters.80 CSF and olfactory mucosa of patients with RBD.95,96 In one
A variety of radionuclide tracers are available to examine case­control study that compared 52 patients with RBD
pre­synaptic and post­synaptic striatal dopaminergic func­ with 40 healthy controls, CSF α­synuclein RT­QuIC
tion using PET or SPECT imaging.81 Among these, only obtained a sensitivity and specifi city of 90%, and the
dopamine transporter­SPECT has an established role in positivity of the test was associa ted with an increased risk
clinical routine due to its availability and moderate cost. of subsequent diagnosis of a synuceleinopathy.96 These
Ligands of the presynaptic monoamine transporter findings suggest that protein misfolding assays for
(ioflupane, trodat) used in dopamine transporter­SPECT α­synuclein might play a role in the detection of prodromal
are sensitive to detect dysfunction or loss of striatal or pre­clinical stages of Parkinson’s disease. Notably, a
dopaminergic terminals and enable the identifi cation of recent CSF PMCA study that encompassed 439 samples,
parkinsonian syndromes with nigral neurod egeneration, including Parkinson’s disease (n=71) and multiple system
including Parkinson’s disease and non­degenerative atrophy (n=33) cases, provided evidence for distinctive
phenocopies, such as essential tremor, psychogenic, or strains of α­synuclein in Parkinson’s disease and multiple
vascular parkinsonism.82 Some studies have attempted to system atrophy and thus the potential to distinguish
use DAT­SPECT to distinguish atypical parkinsonism between different synucleinopathies.91 An overview of the
from Parkinson’s disease by measuring the asymmetry most promising biomarker candidates that could help to
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 393

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Diagnostic potential Disease Comments
progression
Prodromal Parkinson’s Manifest Parkinson’s Differential diagnosis
disease disease (non-Parkinson’s disease)
MRI
Substantia nigra neuromelanin 68,70,71 Possibly informative Informative Not informative Informative Insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease
Dorsolateral nigral hyperintensity74,75 Possibly informative Informative Not informative Not informative Insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease;
no differentiation between Parkinson’s disease and atypical
Parkinson’s disease
Quantitative Susceptibility Unknown Informative Not informative Unknown Limited number of studies; use in differential diagnosis
Mapping69,72,73 unclear; no progression data
Tensor imaging (Free Water MRI; Unknown Informative Informative Unknown Role in early or prodromal disease unclear; no progression data
NODDI)76,77
Automated volumetry78,79 Not informative Not informative Informative Informative Insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease
Multimodal MRI80 Unknown Not informative Informative Unknown Insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease;
no progression data
Radiotracer imaging
α-synuclein Informative Informative Insufficient data Informative Tracers not yet available
Tau97 Not informative Not informative Informative Not informative Mostly studied in Alzheimer’s disease, progressive
supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration; scarce data
for Parkinson’s disease
Blood
Neurofilament98 Not informative Not informative Informative Not informative Non-specific marker for neurodegeneration; insufficiently
studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease
CSF
α-synuclein seeding activity Informative Informative Informative Not informative Can distinguish different α-synuclein strains in Parkinson’s
(RTQuiC, PMCA) 89–92,94,95 disease vs multiple system atrophy
Neurofilament99 Not informative Not informative Informative Not informative Non-specific marker for neurodegeneration; can differentiate
Parkinson’s disease from atypical parkinsonism at group level;
insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease
Tissue biopsies
Dermal α-synuclein Informative Informative Not informative Unknown Requires multi-site sampling; limited sensitivity, not specific
immunohistochemistry86 to Parkinson’s disease vs other synucleinopathies
Dermal α-synuclein seeding activity Unknown Informative Informative Unknown Limited in vivo information
(RT-QuIC; PMCA)93
Olfactory mucosa α-synuclein Possibly informative Informative Unknown Unknown Few studies
seeding activity (RT-QuIC)96
Gastrointestinal α-synuclein87 Unknown Insufficient data Not informative Unknown Invasive; requires multi-site sampling; limited sensitivity
Salivary gland α-synuclein87,88 Informative Informative Not informative Not informative Invasive; limited sensitivity
Defecation
Gut microbiota Unknown Insufficient data Not informative Not informative Variable results regarding different composition of
microbiome between Parkinson’s disease and controls
Digital biomarkers
Multiple motor and non-motor Possibly informative Not informative Not informative Informative Insufficiently studied in prodromal Parkinson’s disease;
assessments or wearable devices100 no differentiation between Parkinson’s disease and atypical
Parkinson’s disease
NODDI=neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging. RT-QuIC=real-time quaking-induced conversion. PMCA=protein misfolding cyclic amplification.
Table 3: Candidate biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease
identify people at­risk and in the prodromal stages of excellent sensitivity and specificity in clinical series,56 but
disease, enhance diagnostic accuracy, and enable monitor­ diagnostic accuracy at a patient’s first visit is less than
ing of disease progression is presented in table 3. 100%, even when assessed by a movement disorder
speciali st. This scenario will improve over the next
Conclusions and future directions decade as new Parkinson’s disease­specific biomarkers
The diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease has profound become availa ble. Observer­independent machine­learn­
implications for patients and their families, and despite ing approaches to MRI data can distinguish Parkinson’s
important advances, it remains a challenge. Diagnosis disease from its atypical mimics, such as multiple system
is anchored on well­defined criteria that have shown atrophy or progressive supranuclear palsy,78 and further
394 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
Contributors
Search strategy and selection criteria ET and WP led the writing of this manuscript. All authors contributed
equally to the literature search, design of tables, panels, and figures,
References for this Review were identified by searches of
and writing of the Review.
PubMed between Jan 1, 2006, and Dec 20, 2020, by use of
Declaration of interests
the following terms: parkins*[title] AND “Parkinson’s
ET reports honoraria for consultancy from TEVA, Bial, Prevail,
disease”, “diagnosis”, “epidemiology”, “risk factor”, “genetic”,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Roche, and BIOGEN, and has received
“premotor”,“prodromal”, and “atypical”. Bibliographies of funding for research from the Spanish Network for Research on
papers were also reviewed. Papers published in English Neurodegenerative Disorders (CIBERNED)­Instituto Carlos III (ISCIII),
and The Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. AG is
and German were considered. The final reference list was
supported by The Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research;
generated on the basis of relevance to the topics covered in and reports honoraria from TEVA Pharma, and travel and meeting
this Review. expenses from the International Movement Disorders Society.
SWS reports funding from the intramural research programme of the
National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke; project number, 1ZIANS003154). SWS serves on
advances in imaging markers for Parkinson’s disease, the Scientific Advisory Council of the Lewy Body Dementia Association
including radiotracer imaging of α­synuclein, are on and is an editorial board member for the Journal of Parkinson’s Disease
the horizon.85 and JAMA Neurology. WP reports personal fees from AbbVie, Affiris,
AstraZeneca, BIAL, Boston Scientific, Britannia, Intec, Ipsen, Lundbeck,
Genetics will play an essential role in the future of
Neuroderm, Neurocrine, Denali Pharmaceuticals, Novartis,
Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. Additional monogenic Orion Pharma, Teva, UCB, and Zambon. He reports consultancy and
forms of Parkinson’s disease can still be identified. lecture fees in relation to clinical drug development programmes
Aside from monogenic Parkinson’s disease, large­scale for Parkinson’s disease and has received grant support from
The Michael J Fox Foundation and the EU FP7 & Horizon 2020
genome­wide association studies show that the genetic
programmes.
cause in most patients is complex, with multiple suscep­
References
tibility variants driving disease risk within each patient.
1 Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders,
Every patient carries numerous genetic risk variants for 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Parkinson’s disease that act synergistically with stochastic Study 2016. Lancet Neurol 2019; 18: 459–80.
2 Dorsey ER, Sherer T, Okun MS, Bloem BR. The emerging
and environmental or lifestyle factors to result in
evidence of the parkinson pandemic. J Parkinsons Dis 2018;
development of the disease. These insights give rise to the 8: S3–8.
possibility of using polygenic risk scores or machine­ 3 Braak H, Del Tredici K, Bratzke H, Hamm­Clement J,
Sandmann­Keil D, Rüb U. Staging of the intracerebral inclusion body
learning algorithms to differentiate patients from healthy
pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (preclinical
controls and to predict patient subgroups, age at onset, and clinical stages). J Neurol 2002; 249 (suppl 3): III/1­III/5.
and clinical features.38,101,102 These advances will also have 4 Steiner JA, Quansah E, Brundin P. The concept of alpha­synuclein
as a prion­like protein: ten years after. Cell Tissue Res 2018;
an effect on the development and application of disease
373: 161–73.
modifying therapies, as already exemplified by ongoing
5 Blauwendraat C, Nalls MA, Singleton AB. The genetic architecture
clinical trials targeting the GBA pathway or LRRK2 of Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol 2020; 19: 170–78.
function.15,103 6 Kalia LV, Lang AE. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 2015; 386: 896–912.
As soon as disease­modifying interventions become 7 Poewe W, Seppi K, Tanner CM, et al. Parkinson disease.
Nat Rev Dis Primers 2017; 3: 17013.
available, there will be pressure to test and apply them to
8 Rajput AH, Rajput A. Accuracy of Parkinson disease diagnosis
individuals in prodromal stages or to individuals with an unchanged in 2 decades. Neurology 2014; 83: 386–87.
increased risk for Parkinson’s disease. Such pre­diagnostic 9 Tolosa E, Gaig C, Santamaría J, Compta Y. Diagnosis and the
premotor phase of Parkinson disease. Neurology 2009;
stages of Parkinson’s disease will only be diagnosed
72 (suppl 7): S12–20.
through biomarkers—including imaging, synuclein 10 Mahlknecht P, Seppi K, Poewe W. The concept of prodromal
assays, tissue biopsies, and genetic biomarkers—that are parkinson’s disease. J Parkinsons Dis 2015; 5: 681–97.
currently being studied. 11 Marras C, Lang A. Parkinson’s disease subtypes: lost in translation?
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013; 84: 409–15.
Parkinson’s disease will evolve from a purely clinical
12 Fereshtehnejad SM, Zeighami Y, Dagher A, Postuma RB. Clinical
to a biomarker­supported diagnostic entity, and new criteria for subtyping Parkinson’s disease: biomarkers and
opport unities for early diagnosis will arise, and the longitudinal progression. Brain 2017; 140: 1959–76.
13 Faghri F, Hashemi SH, Leonard H, et al. Predicting onset,
diagnostic accuracy at the first neurological consultation
progression, and clinical subtypes of Parkinson disease using
will be substantially higher than today. Future generations machine learning. bioRxiv 2018; published online June 4.
of neurologists might no longer view Parkinson’s disease https://doi.org/10.1101/338913 (preprint).
14 Poewe W, Seppi K, Marini K, Mahlknecht P. New hopes for disease
as a single nosological entity, but will be able to confidently
modification in Parkinson’s Disease. Neuropharmacology 2020;
diagnose subtypes with different prognoses and treatment 171: 108085.
responses.40 However, new challenges will arise, particu­ 15 Tolosa E, Vila M, Klein C, Rascol O. LRRK2 in Parkinson disease:
larly when a diagnosis could be made in individuals free challenges of clinical trials. Nat Rev Neurol 2020; 16: 97–107.
16 Jankovic J. Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis.
of symptoms but without the prospect of preventive
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008; 79: 368–76.
therapy. Fortunately, the number of candidate drugs for 17 Gelpi E, Navarro­Otano J, Tolosa E et al. Multiple organ involvement
disease­modification in clinical development has never by alpha­synuclein pathology in Lewy body disorders. Mov Disord
2014; 29: 1010–18.
been as large as today.104
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 395

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
18 Schapira AHV, Chaudhuri KR, Jenner P. Non­motor features of 41 Blauwendraat C, Pletnikova O, Geiger JT, et al. Genetic analysis of
Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2017; 18: 509. neurodegenerative diseases in a pathology cohort. Neurobiol Aging
19 Pont­Sunyer C, Hotter A, Gaig C, et al. The onset of nonmotor 2019; 76: 214.e1–214.e9.
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (the ONSET PD study). 42 Sanchez­Contreras M, Heckman MG, Tacik P, et al. Study of
Mov Disord 2015; 30: 229–37. LRRK2 variation in tauopathy: progressive supranuclear palsy and
20 Zis P, Martinez­Martin P, Sauerbier A, et al. Non­motor symptoms corticobasal degeneration. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 115–23.
burden in treated and untreated early Parkinson’s disease patients: 43 Sidransky E, Nalls MA, Aasly JO, et al. Multicenter analysis of
argument for non­motor subtypes. Eur J Neurol 2015; 22: 1145–50. glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med
21 Barone P, Erro R, Picillo M. Quality of life and nonmotor symptoms 2009; 361: 1651–61.
in Parkinson’s disease. Int Rev Neurobiol 2017; 133: 499–516. 44 Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E, et al. Mutation in the
22 Safarpour D, Thibault DP, DeSanto CL, et al. Nursing home and alpha­synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s
end­of­life care in Parkinson disease. Neurology 2015; 85: 413–19. disease. Science 1997; 276: 2045–47.
23 Ross GW, Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Tanner CM, White LR. Pre­motor 45 Lesage S, Drouet V, Majounie E, et al. Loss of VPS13C function in
features of Parkinson’s disease: the Honolulu­Asia Aging Study autosomal­recessive Parkinsonism causes mitochondrial
experience. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012; 18 (suppl 1): S199–202. dysfunction and increases PINK1/Parkin­dependent mitophagy.
24 Siderowf A, Lang AE. Parkinson’s disease: concepts and definitions. Am J Hum Genet 2016; 98: 500–13.
Mov Disord 2012; 27: 608–16. 46 Schrag A, Ben­Shlomo Y, Quinn N. How valid is the clinical
25 Schrag A, Horsfall L, Walters K, Noyce A, Petersen I. Prediagnostic diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease in the community?
presentations of Parkinson’s disease in primary care: a case­control J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002; 73: 529–34.
study. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14: 57–64. 47 Hughes AJ, Daniel SE, Kilford L, Lees AJ. Accuracy of clinical
26 Salat D, Noyce AJ, Schrag A, Tolosa E. Challenges of modifying diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: a clinico­pathological
disease progression in prediagnostic Parkinson’s disease. study of 100 cases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1992; 55: 181–84.
Lancet Neurol 2016; 15: 637–48. 48 Rizzo G, Copetti M, Arcuti S, Martino D, Fontana A, Logroscino G.
27 Pont­Sunyer C, Tolosa E, Caspell­Garcia C, et al. The prodromal Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease: a systematic
phase of leucine­rich repeat kinase 2­associated Parkinson disease: review and meta­analysis. Neurology 2016; 86: 566–76.
clinical and imaging Studies. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 726–38. 49 Wenning GK, Litvan I, Tolosa E. Milestones in atypical and
28 Mahlknecht P, Stockner H, Marini K, et al. Midbrain secondary Parkinsonisms. Mov Disord 2011; 26: 1083–95.
hyperechogenicity, hyposmia, mild parkinsonian signs and risk 50 Höglinger GU, Respondek G, Stamelou M, et al. Clinical diagnosis
for incident Parkinson’s disease over 10 years: a prospective of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society
population­based study. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2020; 70: 51–54. criteria. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 853–64.
29 Fereshtehnejad SM, Postuma RB. Subtypes of Parkinson’s disease: 51 Adler CH, Beach TG, Hentz JG, et al. Low clinical diagnostic
what do they tell us about disease progression? accuracy of early vs advanced Parkinson disease: clinicopathologic
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2017; 17: 34. study. Neurology 2014; 83: 406–12.
30 Schrag A, Ben­Shlomo Y, Brown R, Marsden CD, Quinn N. 52 Hughes AJ, Daniel SE, Ben­Shlomo Y, Lees AJ. The accuracy of
Young­onset Parkinson’s disease revisited­clinical features, natural diagnosis of parkinsonian syndromes in a specialist movement
history, and mortality. Mov Disord 1998; 13: 885–94. disorder service. Brain 2002; 125: 861–70.
31 Selikhova M, Williams DR, Kempster PA, Holton JL, Revesz T, 53 Koga S, Aoki N, Uitti RJ, et al. When DLB, PD, and PSP masquerade
Lees AJ. A clinico­pathological study of subtypes in Parkinson’s as MSA: an autopsy study of 134 patients. Neurology 2015; 85: 404–12.
disease. Brain 2009; 132: 2947–57. 54 Postuma RB, Berg D, Stern M, et al. MDS clinical diagnostic
32 Stebbins GT, Goetz CG, Burn DJ, Jankovic J, Khoo TK, Tilley BC. criteria for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2015; 30: 1591–601.
How to identify tremor dominant and postural instability/gait 55 Lees AJ, Hardy J, Revesz T. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 2009;
difficulty groups with the movement disorder society unified 373: 2055–66.
Parkinson’s disease rating scale: comparison with the unified 56 Postuma RB, Poewe W, Litvan I, et al. Validation of the MDS
Parkinson’s disease rating scale. Mov Disord 2013; 28: 668–70. clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2018;
33 Simuni T, Caspell­Garcia C, Coffey C, et al. How stable are 33: 1601–08.
Parkinson’s disease subtypes in de novo patients: analysis of the 57 Iranzo A, Tolosa E, Gelpi E, et al. Neurodegenerative disease status
PPMI cohort? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2016; 28: 62–67. and post­mortem pathology in idiopathic rapid­eye­movement sleep
34 Lee JW, Song YS, Kim H, Ku BD, Lee WW. Alteration of tremor behaviour disorder: an observational cohort study. Lancet Neurol
dominant and postural instability gait difficulty subtypes during the 2013; 12: 443–53.
progression of Parkinson’s disease: analysis of the PPMI cohort. 58 Dauvilliers Y, Schenck CH, Postuma RB, et al. REM sleep behaviour
Front Neurol 2019; 10: 471. disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2018; 4: 19.
35 Mu J, Chaudhuri KR, Bielza C, de Pedro­Cuesta J, Larrañaga P, 59 Mahlknecht P, Iranzo A, Högl B, et al. Olfactory dysfunction
Martinez­Martin P. Parkinson’s disease subtypes identified from predicts early transition to a Lewy body disease in idiopathic RBD.
cluster analysis of motor and non­motor symptoms. Neurology 2015; 84: 654–58.
Front Aging Neurosci 2017; 9: 301. 60 Berg D, Postuma RB, Adler CH, et al. MDS research criteria for
36 Fereshtehnejad SM, Romenets SR, Anang JB, Latreille V, prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2015; 30: 1600–11.
Gagnon JF, Postuma RB. New clinical subtypes of parkinson 61 Heinzel S, Berg D, Gasser T, et al. Update of the MDS research
disease and their longitudinal progression: a prospective cohort criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2019;
comparison with other phenotypes. JAMA Neurol 2015; 34: 1464–70.
72: 863–73.
62 Mahlknecht P, Gasperi A, Djamshidian A, et al. Performance of the
37 De Pablo­Fernández E, Lees AJ, Holton JL, Warner TT. Prognosis Movement Disorders Society criteria for prodromal Parkinson’s
and neuropathologic correlation of clinical subtypes of Parkinson disease: a population­based 10­year study. Mov Disord 2018;
disease. JAMA Neurol 2019; 76: 470–79. 33: 405–13.
38 Nalls MA, Blauwendraat C, Vallerga CL, et al. Identification of novel 63 Pilotto A, Heinzel S, Suenkel U, et al. Application of the
risk loci, causal insights, and heritable risk for Parkinson’s disease: movement disorder society prodromal Parkinson’s disease
a meta­analysis of genome­wide association studies. Lancet Neurol research criteria in 2 independent prospective cohorts. Mov Disord
2019; 18: 1091–102. 2017; 32: 1025–34.
39 Bandres­Ciga S, Saez­Atienzar S, Kim JJ, et al. Large­scale pathway 64 Noyce AJ, Bestwick JP, Silveira­Moriyama L, et al. PREDICT­PD:
specific polygenic risk and transcriptomic community network identifying risk of Parkinson’s disease in the community: methods
analysis identifies novel functional pathways in Parkinson disease. and baseline results. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014; 85: 31–37.
Acta Neuropathol 2020; 140: 341–58.
65 Noyce AJ, R’Bibo L, Peress L, et al. PREDICT­PD: an online
40 Berardelli A, Wenning GK, Antonini A, et al. EFNS/MDS­ES/ENS approach to prospectively identify risk indicators of Parkinson’s
[corrected] recommendations for the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 219–26.
disease. Eur J Neurol 2013; 20: 16–34.
396 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021

---PAGE BREAK---

Review
66 Katzenschlager R, Lees AJ. Olfaction and Parkinson’s syndromes: 87 Tsukita K, Sakamaki­Tsukita H, Tanaka K, Suenaga T, Takahashi R.
its role in differential diagnosis. Curr Opin Neurol 2004; 17: 417–23. Value of in vivo α­synuclein deposits in Parkinson’s disease:
67 Krismer F, Pinter B, Mueller C, et al. Sniffing the diagnosis: a systematic review and meta­analysis. Mov Disord 2019;
Olfactory testing in neurodegenerative parkinsonism. 34: 1452–63.
Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2017; 35: 36–41. 88 Vilas D, Iranzo A, Tolosa E, et al. Assessment of α­synuclein in
68 Ohtsuka C, Sasaki M, Konno K, et al. Changes in substantia nigra submandibular glands of patients with idiopathic rapid­eye­
and locus coeruleus in patients with early­stage Parkinson’s disease movement sleep behaviour disorder: a case­control study.
using neuromelanin­sensitive MR imaging. Neurosci Lett 2013; Lancet Neurol 2016; 15: 708–18.
541: 93–98. 89 Fairfoul G, McGuire LI, Pal S, et al. Alpha­synuclein RT­QuIC in
69 Langkammer C, Schweser F, Krebs N, et al. Quantitative the CSF of patients with alpha­synucleinopathies.
susceptibility mapping (QSM) as a means to measure brain iron? Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2016; 3: 812–18.
A post mortem validation study. Neuroimage 2012; 62: 1593–99. 90 Shahnawaz M, Tokuda T, Waragai M, et al. Development of a
70 Wang X, Zhang Y, Zhu C, et al. The diagnostic value of SNpc using biochemical diagnosis of Parkinson disease by detection of
NM­MRI in Parkinson’s disease: meta­analysis. Neurol Sci 2019; α­synuclein misfolded aggregates in cerebrospinal fluid.
40: 2479–89. JAMA Neurol 2017; 74: 163–72.
71 Ehrminger M, Latimier A, Pyatigorskaya N et al. The coeruleus/ 91 Rossi M, Candelise N, et al. Ultrasensitive RT­QuIC assay with high
subcoeruleus complex in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep sensitivity and specificity for Lewy body­associated
behaviour disorder. Brain 2016; 139: 1180–88. synucleinopathies. Acta Neuropathol 2020; 140: 49–62.
72 Murakami Y, Kakeda S, Watanabe K, et al. Usefulness of 92 van Rumund A, Green AJE, Fairfoul G, Esselink RAJ, Bloem BR,
quantitative susceptibility mapping for the diagnosis of Parkinson Verbeek MM. α­Synuclein real­time quaking­induced conversion in
disease. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2015; 36: 1102–08. the cerebrospinal fluid of uncertain cases of parkinsonism.
73 Takahashi H, Watanabe Y, Tanaka H, et al. Comprehensive MRI Ann Neurol 2019; 85: 777–81.
quantification of the substantia nigra pars compacta in Parkinson’s 93 Wang Z, Becker K, Donadio V, Siedlak S, et al. Skin α­Synuclein
disease. Eur J Radiol 2018; 109: 48–56. aggregation seeding activity as a novel biomarker for Parkinson
74 Mahlknecht P, Krismer F, Poewe W, Seppi K. Meta­analysis of disease. JAMA Neurol 2020; 28: e203311.
dorsolateral nigral hyperintensity on magnetic resonance imaging 94 Garrido A, Fairfoul G, Tolosa ES, Martí MJ, Green A. α­synuclein
as a marker for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 619–23. RT­QuIC in cerebrospinal fluid of LRRK2­linked Parkinson’s
75 De Marzi R, Seppi K, Högl B, et al. Loss of dorsolateral nigral disease. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2019; 6: 1024–32.
hyperintensity on 3·0 tesla susceptibility­weighted imaging in 95 Iranzo A, M.D., Fairfoul G, Ayudhaya ACN, et al. Detection of
idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder. Ann Neurol α­synuclein in CSF by RT­QuIC in patients with isolated rapid­eye­
2016; 79: 1026–30. movement sleep behaviour disorder: a longitudinal observational
76 Planetta PJ, Ofori E, Pasternak O, et al. Free­water imaging in study. Lancet Neurol 2021; 20: 203–12.
Parkinson’s disease and atypical parkinsonism. Brain 2016; 96 Stefani A, Iranzo A, Holzknecht E, et al. Alpha­synuclein seeds in
139: 495–508. olfactory mucosa of isolated rapid­eye­movement sleep behaviour
77 Mitchell T, Archer DB, Chu WT, et al. Neurite orientation disorder. Brain (in press).
dispersion and density imaging (NODDI) and free­water imaging 97 Schönecker S, Brendel M, Palleis C, et al. PET imaging of
in Parkinsonism. Hum Brain Mapp 2019; 40: 5094–107. astrogliosis and Tau facilitates diagnosis of Parkinsonian
78 Scherfler C, Göbel G, Müller C, et al. Diagnostic potential of syndromes. Front Aging Neurosci 2019; 11: 249.
automated subcortical volume segmentation in atypical 98 Hansson O, Janelidze S, Hall S, et al. Blood­based NfL: a biomarker
parkinsonism. Neurology 2016; 86: 1242–49. for differential diagnosis of parkinsonian disorder. Neurology 2017;
79 Huppertz HJ, Möller L, Südmeyer M, et al. Differentiation of 88: 930–37.
neurodegenerative parkinsonian syndromes by volumetric 99 Herbert MK, Aerts MB, Beenes M, et al. CSF neurofilament light
magnetic resonance imaging analysis and support vector machine chain but not FLT3 ligand discriminates Parkinsonian disorders.
classification. Mov Disord 2016; 31: 1506–17. Front Neurol 2015; 6: 91.
80 Péran P, Barbagallo G, Nemmi F, et al. MRI supervised and 100 Espay AJ, Bonato P, Nahab FB, et al. Technology in Parkinson’s
unsupervised classification of Parkinson’s disease and multiple disease: challenges and opportunities. Mov Disord 2016; 31: 1272–82.
system atrophy. Mov Disord 2018; 33: 600–08. 101 Nalls MA, McLean CY, Rick J, et al. Diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease
81 Strafella AP, Bohnen NI, Perlmutter JS, et al. Molecular imaging to on the basis of clinical and genetic classification: a population­based
track Parkinson’s disease and atypical parkinsonisms: new imaging modelling study. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14: 1002–09.
frontiers. Mov Disord 2017; 32: 181–92. 102 Escott­Price V, International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics C,
82 Scherfler C, Schwarz J, Antonini A, et al. Role of DAT­SPECT in Nalls MA, et al. Polygenic risk of Parkinson disease is correlated
the diagnostic work up of parkinsonism. Mov Disord 2007; with disease age at onset. Ann Neurol 2015; 77: 582–91.
22: 1229–38. 103 McFarthing K, Buff S, Rafaloff G, Dominey T, Wyse RK, Stott SRW.
83 Matesan M, Gaddikeri S, Longfellow K, et al. I­123 DaTscan SPECT Parkinson’s disease drug therapies in the clinical trial pipeline:
brain imaging in Parkinsonian syndromes: utility of the putamen­ 2020. J Parkinsons Dis 2020; 10: 757–74.
to­caudate tatio. J Neuroimaging 2018; 28: 629–34. 104 Greenland JC, Williams­Gray CH, Barker RA. The clinical
84 Meles SK, Renken RJ, Janzen A, et al; The metabolic pattern of heterogeneity of Parkinson’s disease and its therapeutic
idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder reflects early­stage implications. Eur J Neurosci 2019; 49: 328–38.
Parkinson disease. J Nucl Med 2018; 59: 1437–44.
85 Helmich RC, Vaillancourt DE, Brooks DJ. The future of brain © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
imaging in Parkinson’s Disease. J Parkinsons Dis 2018; 8: S47–51.
86 Donadio V, Incensi A, Leta V, et al. Skin nerve α­synuclein deposits:
a biomarker for idiopathic Parkinson disease. Neurology 2014;
82: 1362–69.
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 20 May 2021 397

---PAGE BREAK---

