insight review articles
Therapeutic approaches to protein-
misfolding diseases
Fred E. Cohen1& Jeffery W. Kelly2
1University of California at San Francisco, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Genentech Hall, 600 16th Street N472J,
San Francisco, California 94107, USA (e-mail: cohen@cmpharm.ucsf.edu)
2Department of Chemistry and the Skaggs Institute of Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Rd, BCC 265,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA (e-mail: jkelly@scripps.edu)
Several sporadic and genetic diseases are caused by protein misfolding. These include cystic fibrosis and
other devastating diseases of childhood as well as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and other debilitating maladies of
the elderly. A unified view of the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of these conditions has led to the
search for chemical chaperones that can slow, arrest or revert disease progression. Molecules are now
emerging that link our biophysical insights with our therapeutic aspirations.
H
ow and whether a protein folds in vivoare influ- teins, and drugs that increase the native-state stability or
enced primarily by its amino-acid sequence increase the kinetic barrier to misfolding aggregation
and the cellular environment surrounding the (see Box 1).
polypeptide chain1. Protein folding in the cell In this review, we focus on small molecules, antibodies
occurs either in the cytoplasm or within the and dominant-negative protein subunits that increase the
secretory pathway (see the review in this issue by Dobson, stability of the native state and/or increase the activation
page 884). ATP-dependent chaperones in the cytoplasm and barrier associated with misfolding because these approaches
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) collaborate to are innovative and likely to be efficacious.
give a polypeptide chain several opportunities to fold. If
folding is unsuccessful, the polypeptide is directed to the Small-molecule chaperones and treatment of disease
proteasome — a large multisubunit protease — for degra- Many wild-type (WT) proteins fold inefficiently in the ER,
dation (see the review in this issue by Goldberg, page 895). even with the aid of the heat shock protein 40/70/90 (hsp40,
Ensuring accuracy in protein folding is crucial for maintain- hsp70 and hsp90) chaperone system that facilitates the
ing proper cellular function. refolding or retrotranslocation of misfolded proteins back
Several diseases are caused by a loss of protein function into the cytoplasm, where they are degraded by the protea-
because the misfolded proteins have been degraded by the some. Mutations further reduce folding efficiency by
proteasome. Cystic fibrosis and a1-antitrypsin (a1-AT) altering the energetics of proper folding. However, small-
deficiency are well-known heritable diseases that fall into molecule ligands that bind to the native state of these
this category2–4. Other misfolding diseases are caused by mutant proteins can stabilize the native state or destabilize
conformational changes coupled to the aggregation of mis- the transition state (see Box 1) to compensate for the
folded proteins outside the cell, beyond the influence of influence of the mutation (Fig. 1).
intracellular quality-control systems. The major represen- Bouvier and colleagues9have shown that selective V2-
tatives of these disorders are the amyloidoses, in which receptor antagonists (for example, SR121463A and VPA985)
protein aggregation in the extracellular space is associated can lead to a 15-fold increase in expression of functional V2
with the appearance of a toxic function5,6. vasopressin receptor at the cell surface, rescuing these recep-
Proteins that use the secretory pathway for folding and tors from proteasome degradation. Antagonists that were
trafficking are over-represented in protein-misfolding not cell permeable were ineffective, showing the importance
diseases. These proteins fold in the ER and then proceed of intercepting the misfolded protein in the cell and most
through the secretory pathway to their final destination, likely in the ER. Chemical chaperones are small molecules
where the environment can be very different. For example, that bind to a protein, stabilize the folded state and thereby
lysosomal enzymes have to fold at neutral pH to leave the reduce protein misfolding. The cell-permeable chemical
ER, yet their sequences are optimized for folding and stabili- chaperoneswere able to functionally complement more than
ty at pH 5 (lysosomal pH). So mutations in lysosomal pro- six V2 receptor variants, some of which are associated with
teins can adversely alter folding in the ER, leading to degra- nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. These investigators also
dation by the quality-control machinery. Ironically, many of used chemical chaperones to complement the misfolding
the variants that cause heritable lysosomal storage diseases tendencies of variants of the d-opioid receptor10.
would be able to fold into functional enzymes in the lyso- Conn and colleagues11have demonstrated that it is possi-
some, if only they could get there7,8. In contrast, amyloido- ble to use indoles, quinolones and erythromycin macrolides
genic proteins seem to fold efficiently in the ER but get into to complement the secretion-deficient loss-of-function
trouble in their destination environments, where they mis- variants of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor
fold and misassemble, a process known as amyloidogenesis. (GnRHR) in transiently transfected COS-7 cells. ER-per-
The thermodynamic principles behind protein folding are meable agonists and antagonists with a high affinity for WT
discussed in Box 1. GnRHR were most efficient at chaperoning several, but not
Therapeutic intervention can take the form of drugs that all, GnRHR variants out of the ER, and enabling their traf-
reduce the production of a certain protein, drugs that ficking to the plasma membrane where they function. In an
increase the rate of clearance of misfolded/aggregated pro- analogous approach, defects in rhodopsin folding in the
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.n©at u2re0.0co3m N/naattuurree PublishingGroup 905

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Box 1
The thermodynamics of protein folding
In discussing therapeutic approaches to diseases Physiological conditions Misfolding conditions
of protein misfolding, it is useful to consider the
kinetic and thermodynamic underpinnings (see
figure). Most proteins easily find their native state
because the free energy of activation (DG‡, which
dictates rate) separating the unfolded and D G‡ Environment change
transition states is surmountable, and the folded
D G‡*
state is substantially more stable than the
unfolded state (the difference in free energy, DG,
dictates the relative populations of folded and
unfolded proteins). For aggregation-prone Unfolded D G N fo o ld rm ed ally
proteins, it has become clear that the misfolded
oligomeric state can be more stable than the
functional three-dimensional structure under D G*
certain conditions, including those associated
with a high-denaturation stress47,48. Fortunately,
the kinetic barrier, DG‡, separating the native and Aggregation Oligomer (n) Oligomer
misfolded states is usually insurmountable on a competent conformer (n+1)
biologically relevant time frame, and, in most or multimeric seed
cases, intrinsic clearance mechanisms operate
more efficiently than the misfolding process19,49.
Because the misfolding process involves
multimerization of individual chains, DG‡* has two
components, one relating to the conformation of
the monomer and a second relating to
multimerization that is dependent on concentration. The asterisk indicates that this DG‡
is the barrier between the monomeric conformer
and a multimer that can oligomerize efficiently.
The free-energy diagram in the top left panel of
the figure indicates to what extent a given
sequence under native conditions prefers a
normally folded conformation. The difference in
free energy (DG) between the native state and the
unfolded ensemble of conformations (unfolded Aggregation-competent monomer concentration
state) dictates the relative population of each
state. The free energy of activation (DG‡) governs
how fast one conformation will convert to another. Under denaturing antibody in altering the free energy of activation, DG‡4DH‡1TDS‡, for
conditions, a misfolded aggregation-competent conformation can be amyloidogenesis. Situations below the diagonal permit amyloidogenesis,
preferred to the normally folded native state as a consequence of the whereas those found above the diagonal resist misassembly.
interplay between sequence and environment1, as shown in the top right After this energetic analysis, it is possible to consider therapeutics in
panel of the figure. For example, the environment surrounding the three classes: interventions that decrease production; small molecules,
polypeptide can change as a result of intracellular or extracellular antibodies or dominant-negative protein subunits that increase native
alterations. DG and DG‡have implications analogous to those described state stability and/or the kinetic barrier to misfolding/aggregation; and
above. The bottom panel of the figure illustrates the interplay between approaches that increase clearance of the misfolded monomer,soluble
sequence, monomer concentration and the presence of drug or multimer or insoluble amyloid.
disease retinitis pigmentosa were corrected by using retinal-based lysosomes of b-Glu-deficient cells can competitively displace the
ligands12, as were human ether-a-gogo-relatedgene (HERG) muta- inhibitor, allowing the enzyme to function. Kelly and colleagues8
tions by channel blockers13. have shown that a subset of N-alkylated deoxynorjirimycins and sim-
The most prevalent lysosomal storage disease, Gaucher’s disease, pler six-membered ring N-heterocycles increase the activity of b-Glu
is caused by the inefficient folding and trafficking of certain variants within human cells8; the best compounds discovered so far double
of b-glucocerebrosidase (b-Glu). The most prominent mutation b-Glu activity. This should be sufficient to ameliorate the pathology
(N370S) and other b-Glu mutations were thought to alter active-site of Gaucher’s disease and could offer a convenient alternative to intra-
residues. However, it is now becoming clear that several of these muta- venous enzyme replacement therapy; however, relevant transgenic
tions interfere with folding in the ER and/or trafficking. The intracel- animal models to test this approach are not yet available.
lular activity of misfolded variants such as N370S can be partly Fan et al.14have shown that it is possible to use the small molecule
restored by administering cell-permeable b-Glu inhibitors that serve 1-deoxy-galactonojirimycin, a potent competitive inhibitor of a-
as chemical chaperones. These inhibitors seem to provide a template galactosidase A (a-Gal A), to rescue the misfolding and mistraffick-
that complements the active site of b-Glu, stabilizing the native state ing associated with certain Fabry-disease-causing mutations. These
in the ER, allowing b-Glu to leave the ER and be trafficked to the chemical chaperones facilitate the proper folding and trafficking
lysosome. The high concentration of the glycolipid substrate in the of a-Gal A variants to the lysosome, increasing enzyme activity
eht
fo
noitavitca
fo ygrene
eerf
gnisaercnI
noitagergga
gnilbane
egnahc
lanoitamrofnoc
Normally folded
state or
conformational
ensemble
WT b -Glu pH 5
WT-TTR + drug WT b -Glu pH 7
Normal
physiological Aggregation-
Ig light situation prone Ig chain
light chains
Mutant-TTR + drug Mutant b -Glu
pH 5 WT-TTR
Ab + antibody
Misfolded
Mutant b -Glu
pH 7
and aggregation
prone
Ab
Mutant TTR
‡S
TD –
‡H
D =
‡G
D
niahc
niahc
906 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
seven- to eightfold in cells when used at sub-inhibitory intracellular polyneuropathy19. These individuals make TTR tetramers composed
concentrations. Biophysical experiments suggest that these chemical of T119M and/or V30M subunits. The incorporation of T119M sub-
chaperones stabilize the enzyme. Oral administration of 1-deoxy- units imparts kinetic stability by increasing the tetramer-dissociation
galactonorjirimycin to transgenic mice with Fabry disease expressing barrier, slowing the rate of TTR-amyloid fibril formation19. This result
a variant of a-Gal A increased the enzyme activity significantly in sev- suggests that interallelic and intra-allelic trans-suppression of mis-
eral organs14. Chaperoning of a-Gal A can also be accomplished by folding could become very powerful therapeutic strategies for the pre-
galactose infusions in humans15. vention of misfolding diseases. It might be difficult to use suppressor
Other loss-of-function diseases, including cystic fibrosis, might proteins delivered by exogeneous supplementation owing to the slow
be corrected by chemical chaperones2,3. Cystic fibrosis caused by the kinetics of subunit exchange and the possible antigenicity of suppres-
DF508 mutation in the Cl–channel protein results from chaperone- sor variants20. Similar approaches have been suggested to prevent p53
mediated retention of this mutant in the ER and subsequent degrada- misfolding in a variety of cancers21. Gene therapy, once practical,
tion of this channel by the proteasome. Investigators at Vertex and a should be very useful for the implementation of trans-suppression.
group at the University of California, San Francisco have recently
identified small molecules that bind to and stabilize the DF508 Cl–
channel in the ER, enabling the channel to exit from the ER and to be
trafficked to the plasma membrane, where it exhibits sufficient
activity to partly ameliorate the disease16.
a1-AT is a member of the serpin family of protease inhibitors and
is secreted by liver cells to control the proteolytic activity of a variety
of circulating enzymes. In a1-AT deficiency, a misfolded but other- ER
wise functional mutant protein is retained in the ER of liver cells. The
failure to secrete a1-AT into the circulation allows neutrophil elastase
to degrade lung parenchyma, causing emphysema. Perlmutter and Lysosome
colleagues17have shown that osmolytes such as 4-phenylbutyric acid
and glycerol increase the secretion efficiency of a1-AT in cell lines and in
transgenic animals. Although these compounds do not bind to a1-AT
specifically, they increase the secretion efficiency of variants of
a1-AT that are normally retained in the ER. 4-Phenylbutyric acid and
glycerol accomplish this without influencing the secretion efficiency Nucleus
of other proteins or by decreasing proteasome activity. We speculate
that these osmolytes upregulate the chaperone system in cells and in
transgenic mice expressing variants of a1-AT. This would explain
why misfolded variants of a1-AT, but not other WT proteins, are
secreted more efficiently. We suspect that this is not a pure osmolytic
Golgi stack
effect in cells because the most potent osmolyte, trimethylamine
N-oxide, does not increase secretion efficiency. This is reminiscent
of the impact of guanidinium chloride, a potent denaturant, on
curing the prion Psi+ phenotype in yeast, a result attributable to
chaperone changes.
Stabilizing proteins that misfold after secretion ER lumen
The misfolding and misassembly that occur within the ER are largely Proteasome
Secretory vesicular
controlled by the interplay between the chaperone and proteasome
trafficking
systems. Misfolding and misassembly occurring later in the secretory
Cytoplasm
pathway or outside the cell, after secretion or membrane attachment,
are more difficult to correct. Extracellular amyloid and related aggre-
gates can be degraded by immune-system pathways including catab- Plasma
membrane
olism by macrophages. Unfortunately, aggregate clearance is often
slowed down by disease and ageing, leading to the accumulation of
misfolded and misassembled proteins thought to be responsible for
diseases such as Alzheimer’s and the familial amyloidoses.
Mutant Folded mutant
unfolded enzyme lysosomal enzyme
Transthyretin amyloidosis Ribosome
Stabilization of the native state is one approach to prevent post-secre- Chemical Lysosomal
chaperone enzyme substrate
tory misfolding that has been studied extensively in the case of
transthyretin (TTR) amyloidogenesis. TTR is secreted into the plas-
ma as a homotetramer with 127 amino-acid subunits, and is the Figure 1 Folding of mutant proteins destined to be lysosomal enzymes. Cell-permeable
backup transporter for thyroxine and the primary transporter of chemical chaperones (dark red triangles) act as a template for variant lysosomal
holo-retinol-binding protein. Tetramer dissociation to a misfolded enzymes as they fold in the ER. Some of these lysosomal enzymes would otherwise
monomer is typically rate-limiting for TTR misassembly, and leads misfold and be retained in the ER and ultimately be degraded by the proteasome.
to the formation of non-fibrillar and amyloid aggregates. All of the Chemical chaperones facilitate folding in the ER lumen, which is necessary for proper
TTR mutations associated with familial disease studied so far trafficking to the lysosome where a high concentration of substrate (red triangles) exists
decrease tetramer stability and, in the most severe cases, increase the to compete with the chemical chaperones that bind to the active site. Although the
speed of dissociation and thus of amyloidogenesis18. Interallelic chemical chaperones are crucial for folding at pH 7 (for example, in the ER), the variant
trans-suppression of TTR amyloidogenesis has been observed in a lysosomal enzymes might not need the chaperones when they arrive in the lysosome
compound heterozygous Portuguese family, who express the dis- (where the pH is about 5) because their sequences are stably folded at this pH.
ease-associated mutation V30M but do not develop familial amyloid
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 907

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Evidence that trans-suppression ameliorates TTR amyloid cancer) or plasma-cell dyscrasia overproduce an antibody light-
disease provides both an incentive and the biological rationale to chain clone that is prone to aggregation. Light-chain aggregation
search for small molecules that stabilize the native state and/or desta- often results in progressive organ failure, making it difficult to use
bilize the transition state associated with TTR amyloidogenesis22. autologous blood stem-cell transplantation to treat the cancerous
Screening and structure-based design have identified six distinct component of this disease. Direct approaches to decrease light-chain
classes of small molecules that bind with high affinity to the unoccu- production by the use of specific antibodies, antisense RNA or short
pied thyroxine-binding sites within TTR. These small molecules sta- interfering RNA are likely to be difficult owing to the patient-specific
bilize the native state, preventing amyloidogenesis and denaturation features of each plasma-cell dyscrasia32. However, it is possible that
at low pH and in a wide variety of chaotropes and organic solvents for Velcade, a proteasome inhibitor that is effective in the treatment of
extended periods (for example, weeks)19. When ligand binding stabi- multiple myeloma, could have a paradoxical palliative effect on light-
lizes the native state by more than 3 kcal mol–1(about 12.5 kJ mol–1), chain aggregation. Plasma cells need an efficient proteasome system
the concentration of the misfolded amyloidogenic monomer to manipulate antibodies, so proteasome inhibitors could disable or
decreases by more than 100-fold (assuming that the barriers associat- kill neoplastic cells faster than new cells arise, decreasing the manu-
ed with misfolding are readily surmountable). Decreasing the con- facture of light chains.
centration of the aggregation-prone species is important because
amyloidogenesis is a high-order kinetic process; decreasing the con- Intervention in Alzheimer’s disease
centration modestly can therefore markedly influence the aggrega- The risk of Alzheimer’s disease is strongly influenced by two compet-
tion rate23. Stabilization of the native state by a ligand also has kinetic itive ER processing pathways. The amyloid precursor protein (APP)
ramifications when the ligand selectively stabilizes the native state has a single membrane-spanning helix that is processed by either
over the transition state19. TTR tetramer stabilization by ligand bind- a-secretase (about 90%) or by the b- and g-secretases (about 10%).
ing often increases the DG‡of dissociation (see Box 1), markedly The cleavage by a-secretase produces two fragments that do not pro-
slowing the typical rate-limiting step of TTR amyloidogenesis. The duce amyloids. The b-secretase and subsequent g-secretase cleavages
mechanistic similarities between trans-suppression and native-state yield three fragments; the smallest of which is a family of 39–43-
small-molecule stabilization imply that altering denaturation ener- residue peptides referred to as Ab. These fragments have a tendency
getics with ligands will probably be effective in humans. to assemble into a variety of aggregates, including amyloid fibrils.
Generally speaking, the longer the Abpeptide, the more amyloido-
Prion disease genic it is. Its exact length distribution is controlled by the allosteric
The agreement between the various mouse models of prion disease modulation of g-secretase.
and their human and bovine counterparts provides a prototypic set- Inhibition of Ab-fibril formation might be a reasonable thera-
ting for the exploration of therapeutic approaches to diseases of mis- peutic strategy, because familial mutations that lead to an increase in
folding. These therapeutic efforts can be divided into two broad class- Abconcentration or to its aggregation increase neuropathology33–35.
es, serendipitous and mechanistic. A variety of compounds including Peptidomimetics, based on the peptide LVFFA from Ab, modified at
anthracyclines, porphyrins and diazo dyes block prion replication the amino or carboxy terminus, and the all-D(right-handed) version
when administered with PrPSc, the aggregated infectious form of the and several retroinverso peptidomimetics, block both Abseeding
prion protein, into animal models24,25. Unfortunately, this is not a clin- and growth. Unfortunately the pharmacological profile of these
ically relevant model for therapeutic intervention, because subclinical compounds is far from ideal33. Non-peptidic, aromatic-rich Ab
disease exists for months in mice and years in humans. Efforts to iden- aggregation inhibitors have also been reported by many pharmaceu-
tify more potent analogues of these molecules have been disappoint- tical and biotechnology companies. These compounds typically
ing; however, quinacrine might prove to be a different case. As inhibit the aggregation of Ab and several other amyloidogenic
quinacrine is an approved pharmaceutical, clinical trials are being car- polypeptides. Their lack of specificity might be a problem; it now
ried out to test the usefulness of this molecule in patients with seems likely that mammalian melanocytes and related cell types
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease. Medicinal chemistry efforts are underway make amyloid for functional purposes36. Moreover, recent evidence
to identify more potent agents. For example, some bisacridines are suggests that soluble, diffusible non-fibrillar Abaggregates lead to
10–20-fold more potent than quinacrine. Animal studies are under- pathology in Alzheimer’s disease5,37–39. This calls into question the
way to characterize the efficacy of bisacridines in the treatment of merits of the subset of these compounds that shift the distribution
prion disease. Recently, Zahn and colleagues26have used NMR spec- from fibrils towards soluble, diffusible non-fibrillar Abaggregates.
troscopy and chemical-shift titration to show that quinacrine binds Because Abaggregation is highly dependent on monomer con-
specifically to PrPC, the normally folded cellular isoform of the prion centration (because of its high kinetic order) and on the distribution
protein. This observation could accelerate drug-development efforts. of Abfamily members, substantial effort has gone into the develop-
Studies of heterozygous and homozygous mice with PrP knocked ment of inhibitors, activators and modulators of the secretases40,41.
out show that decreasing or eliminating PrPCproduction will slow or Decreasing the concentration of Abbelow the critical concentration
prevent prion infection. Similarly, antibody studies suggest that prevents aggregation42, and so it is not necessary to block all Abpro-
more efficient clearance of PrP could slow or cure prion disease27–29. duction. Several b-secretase inhibitors are now available, and this
These results complement similar efforts with Alzheimer’s disease30. seems to be a promising approach because mice lacking b-secretase
As with other aggregation-prone proteins, the tendency for PrPCto do not have an overt phenotype. Considerable progress has also been
misfold can be altered by proteins that bind to PrPC. In prion disease, made in developing g-secretase inhibitors. However, the side-effect
PrPScclearly induces misfolding, so antibodies or small molecules profile for these inhibitors must be considered carefully: mice lacking
that antagonize this interaction should prove useful. There is also g-secretase die in uterobecause this enzyme processes notch, a regu-
genetic evidence that other host molecules facilitate PrPSc latory protein required for development. A therapeutic window for
replication31. Dominant-negative variants of PrPCslow or stop PrPSc g-secretase inhibitors will require substantial inhibition of Abpro-
replication in cell culture and in transgenic animals. Small molecules cessing without the complete inhibition of notch processing. Golde
designed to mimic this dominant-negative effect can block PrPSc and Koo43have shown that some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
replication in cell culture as well. drugs can influence the processing of APP to produce less Ab1–42;
others have shown that cholesterol depletion can markedly decrease
Multiple myeloma the overall amount of Abproduced.
Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosesare particularly challeng- When APP transgenic mice overexpressing Abare actively immu-
ing from a therapeutic perspective. Multiple myeloma (plasma-cell nized with Abpeptides, deposits that would ordinarily accumulate
908 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
are cleared44. Passive immunotherapy with intravenous Abantibody 13.Ficker, E., Obejero-Paz, C. A., Zhao, S. & Brown, A. M. The binding site for channel blockers that
also prevents the formation of Ab deposits in animals that would rescue misprocessed human long QT syndrome type 2 ether-a-gogo-related gene (HERG) mutations.
otherwise be deposit-laden. Unfortunately, active immunization of J. Biol. Chem.277,4989–4998 (2002).
patients with Alzheimer’s disease using Ab1–42 revealed antibodies 14.Fan, J.-Q., Ishii, S., Asano, N. & Suzuki, Y. Accelerated transport and maturation of lysosomal a-
galactosidase A in Fabry lymphoblasts by an enzyme inhibitor. Nature Med.5,112–115 (1999).
crossing the blood–brain barrier causing meningoencephalitis-like 15.Frustaci, A. et al. Improvement in cardiac function in the cardiac variant of Fabry’s disease with
inflammation in 4% of the trial participants, presumably originating galactose-infusion therapy. N. Engl. J. Med.345,25–32 (2001).
from microglial activation45. This resulted in the discontinuation of 16.Springsteel, M. F. et al. Benzoflavone activators of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator: towards a pharmacophore model for the nucleotide-binding domain. Bioorg. Medic. Chem.
the clinical trial. Cautious optimism still exists for passive
11,4113–4120 (2003).
immunotherapy in humans, because anti-Ab antibody infusion 17.Burrows, J. A. J., Willis, L. K. & Perlmutter, D. H. Chemical chaperones mediate increased secretion of
could be stopped if meningoencephalitis symptoms develops46. mutant a1-antitrypsin (a1-AT) Z: a potential pharmacological strategy for prevention of liver injury
and emphysema in a1-AT deficiency. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,1796–1801 (2000).
18.Hammarstrom, P., Jiang, X., Hurshman, A. R., Powers, E. T. & Kelly, J. W. Sequence-dependent
Future considerations
denaturation energetics: a major determinant in amyloid disease diversity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
Although thermodynamics undoubtedly has a role in misfolding 99,16427–16432 (2002).
diseases, it is the kinetics of misfolding and misassembly that seems to 19.Hammarstrom, P., Wiseman, R. L., Powers, E. T. & Kelly, J. W. Prevention of transthyretin amyloid
disease by changing protein misfolding energetics. Science299,713–716 (2003).
have the dominant influence. New therapeutics are likely to come
20.Schneider, F., Hammarstrom, P. & Kelly, J. W. Transthyretin slowly exchanges subunits under
from medicinal chemistry efforts and clinical trial designs based on physiological conditions: a convenient chromatographic method to study subunit exchange in
the considerations discussed here. We therefore expect that orally oligomeric proteins. Protein Sci.10,1606–1613 (2001).
administered chemical chaperones that treat lysosomal storage dis- 21.Nikolova, P. V., Wong, K.-B., DeDecker, B., Henckel, J. & Fersht, A. R. Mechanism of rescue of common
p53 cancer mutations by second-site suppressor mutations. EMBO J.19,370–378 (2000).
eases will replace intravenous enzyme replacement therapy as the
22.Sacchettini, J. C. & Kelly, J. W. Therapeutic strategies for human amyloid diseases. Nature Rev. Drug
standard treatment for these rare inherited conditions. Some drugs Discov. 1,267–275 (2002).
have already been identified that block the destruction of mutant 23.White, J. T. & Kelly, J. W. Support for the multigenic hypothesis of amyloidosis: the binding
stoichiometry of retinol-binding protein, vitamin A, and thyroid hormone influences transthyretin
integral membrane proteins exhibiting suboptimal folding in the ER.
amyloidogenicity in vitro. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98,13019–13024 (2001).
We believe that therapeutics based on similar approaches will soon 24.Korth, C., May, B. C. H., Cohen, F. E. & Prusiner, S. B. Acridine and phenothiazine derivatives as
enter clinical trials for patients with cystic fibrosis and a1-AT pharmacotherapeutics for prion disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98,9836–9841 (2001).
deficiency. For the amyloid-deposition diseases, small alterations in 25.May, B. C. H. et al. Potent inhibition of scrapie prion replication in cultured cells by bis-acridines.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA100,3416–3421 (2003).
the rate of aggregation mediated by stabilization of the native state or
26.Vogtherr, M. et al. Antimalarial drug quinacrine binds to C-terminal helix of cellular prion protein.
depletion of the precursor could stabilize or improve patients with J. Med. Chem.46,3563–3564 (2003).
these diseases. Enhanced clearance of amyloidogenic aggregates by 27.Peretz, D. et al. Antibodies inhibit prion propagation and clear cell cultures of prion infectivity.
immunotherapy also seems promising. Given the challenges posed Nature412,739–743 (2001).
28.White, A. R. et al. Monoclonal antibodies inhibit prion replication and delay the development of
by unregulated immune responses after vaccination, passive
prion disease. Nature422, 80–83 (2003).
immunotherapy is more likely to be available in the short term. More 29.Heppner, F. L. et al. Prevention of scrapie pathogenesis by transgenic expression of anti-prion protein
clinically palatable small-molecule approaches will follow with the antibodies. Science294,178–182 (2001).
30.Solomon, B. Anti-aggregating antibodies, a new approach towards treatment of conformational
more typical timeline for pharmaceutical discovery and develop-
diseases. Curr. Med. Chem.9,1737–1749 (2002).
ment. The histological aggregates observed by Lewy, Pick and other 31.Telling, G. C. et al. Prion propagation in mice expressing human and chimeric PrP transgenes
noted pathologists more than a century ago have recently been iden- implicates the interaction of cellular PrP with another protein. Cell83,79–90 (1995).
tified as largely homogeneous deposits of misfolded proteins. A large 32.Ohno, S. et al. The antisense approach in amyloid light chain amyloidosis: identification of
monoclonal Ig and inhibition of its production by antisense oligonucleotides in in vitroand in vivo
and increasing number of diseases are now associated with the accel-
models. J. Immunol.169,4039–4045 (2002).
erated production and/or delayed clearance of protein aggregates. 33.Findeis, M. A. Peptide inhibitors of beta amyloid aggregation. Curr. Top. Med. Chem.2,417–423
With the development of pharmacological approaches to these (2002).
diseases, we are participating in a journey from the bedside to the 34.Yang, D.-S. et al. Assembly of Alzheimer’s amyloid-bfibrils and approaches for therapeutic
bench and now back to the bedside. nn 35.H in o te w r l v e e t n t, t D io . n R . . A e m t a y l l . o I i n d h 8 i , b 1 it 0 i – o 1 n 9 o ( f 2 f 0 ib 0 r 1 i ) l . formation in b-amyloid peptide by a novel series of
benzofurans. Biochem. J.340,283–289 (1999).
doi:10.1038/nature02265 36.Kelly, J. W. & Balch, W. E. Amyloid as a natural product. J. Cell Biol.161,461–462 (2003).
37.Lamber, M. P. et al.Diffusible, nonfibrillar ligands derived from Ab1–42 are potent central nervous
1. Anfinsen, C. B. Principles that govern the folding of protein chains. Science181,223–230 (1973).
system neurotoxins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA95,6448–6453 (1998).
2. Powell, K. & Zeitlin, P. L. Therapeutic approaches to repair defects in DF508 CFTR folding and 38.Kayed, R. et al. Common structure of soluble amyloid oligomers implies common mechanism of
cellular targeting. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.54,1395–1408 (2002). pathogenesis. Science300,486–489 (2003).
3. Howard, M. & Welch, W. J. Manipulating the folding pathway of DF508 CFTR using chemical 39.Walsh, D. M. et al. Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid bprotein potently inhibit hippocampal
chaperones. Methods Mol. Med.70,267–275 (2002). long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature416,535–539 (2002).
4. Carrell, R. W. & Lomas, D. A. Mechanisms of disease. Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency—a model for 40.Wolfe, M. S. g-Secretase as a target for Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Top. Med. Chem.2,371–383 (2002).
conformational diseases. N. Engl. J. Med.346,45–53 (2002). 41.Vassar, R. b-Secretase (BACE) as a drug target for Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.54,
5. Rochet, J.-C. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. Amyloid fibrillogenesis: themes and variations. Curr. Opin. Struct. 1589–1602 (2002).
Biol.10,60–68 (2000). 42.Jarrett, J. T. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. Seeding ‘one-dimensional crystallization’ of amyloid: A pathogenic
6. Kelly, J. W. Alternative conformations of amyloidogenic proteins govern their behavior. Curr. Opin. mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease and scrapie? Cell73,1055–1058 (1993).
Struct. Biol.6,11–17 (1996). 43.Golde, T. E., Eriksen, J. L., Weggen, S., Sagi, S. A. & Koo, E. H. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
7. Fan, J.-Q. A contradictory treatment for lysosomal storage disorders: inhibitors enhance mutant as therapeutic agents for Alzheimer’s disease. Drug Dev. Res.56,415–420 (2002).
enzyme activity. Trends Pharm. Sci.24,355–360 (2003). 44.Spooner, E. T., Desai, R. V., Mori, C., Leverone, J. F. & Lemere, C. A. The generation and
8. Sawkar, A. R. et al. Chemical chaperones increase the cellular activity of N370S b-glucosidase: a characterization of potentially therapeutic Abantibodies in mice: differences according to strain and
therapeutic strategy for Gaucher disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA99,15428–15433 (2002). immunization protocol. Vaccine21,290–297 (2002).
9. Morello, J.-P. et al. Pharmacological chaperones rescue cell-surface expression and function of 45.Nicoll, J. A. R. et al. Neuropathology of human Alzheimer disease after immunization with amyloid-b
misfolded V2 vasopressin receptor mutants. J. Clin. Inv.105,887–895 (2000). peptide: a case report. Nature Med.9,448–452 (2003).
10.Petaja-Repo, U. E. et al.Ligands act as pharmacological chaperones and increase the efficiency of 46.Solomon, B. Protective molecules in Alzheimer’s disease: therapeutic antibodies. Drug News Perspect.
dopioid receptor maturation. EMBO J.21,1628–1637 (2002). 15,410–416 (2002).
11.Janovick, J. A. et al. Structure–activity relations of successful pharmacologic chaperones for rescue of 47.Colon, W. & Kelly, J. W. Partial denaturation of transthyretin is sufficient for amyloid fibril formation
naturally occurring and manufactured mutants of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor. in vitro. Biochemistry31,8654–8660 (1992).
J. Pharm. Exp. Ther. 305,608–614 (2003). 48.Fandrich, M., Fletcher, M. A. & Dobson, C. M. Amyloid fibrils from muscle myoglobin. Nature410,
12.Noorwez, S. M. et al. Pharmacological chaperone-mediated in vivofolding and stabilization of the 165–166 (2001).
P23H-opsin mutant associated with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. J. Biol. Chem.278, 49.Baskakov, I. V., Legname, G., Prusiner, S. B. & Cohen, F. E. Folding of prion protein to its native a-
14442–14450 (2003). helical conformation is under kinetic control. J. Biol. Chem. 276,19687–19690 (2001).
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 909

---PAGE BREAK---

