nature reviews molecular cell biology https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-023-00647-2
Review article Check for updates
Mechanisms and pathology of
protein misfolding and aggregation
Nikolaos Louros 1,2, Joost Schymkowitz1,2 & Frederic Rousseau 1,2
Abstract Sections
Despite advances in machine learning-based protein structure Introduction
prediction, we are still far from fully understanding how proteins
Theories of protein folding and
fold into their native conformation. The conventional notion that misfolding
polypeptides fold spontaneously to their biologically active states Links between conformational
stability and aggregation
has gradually been replaced by our understanding that cellular
protein folding often requires context-dependent guidance from Kinetic partitioning of the
native state
molecular chaperones in order to avoid misfolding. Misfolded proteins
can aggregate into larger structures, such as amyloid fibrils, which The amyloid state and
polymorphism
perpetuate the misfolding process, creating a self-reinforcing cascade.
Kinetic principles of amyloid
A surge in amyloid fibril structures has deepened our comprehension
formation
of how a single polypeptide sequence can exhibit multiple amyloid
Interactions and toxicity of
conformations, known as polymorphism. The assembly of these
amyloids
polymorphs is not a random process but is influenced by the specific
Conclusions and perspectives
conditions and tissues in which they originate. This observation
suggests that, similar to the folding of native proteins, the kinetics of
pathological amyloid assembly are modulated by interactions specific
to cells and tissues. Here, we review the current understanding of
how intrinsic protein conformational propensities are modulated by
physiological and pathological interactions in the cell to shape protein
misfolding and aggregation pathology.
1Switch Laboratory, VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium. 2Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. e-mail: Joost.schymkowitz@kuleuven.be; Frederic.rousseau@
kuleuven.be
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 912

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Introduction so-called free-energy landscape, whereby the vertical axis corresponds
Proteins execute a dazzling diversity of functionalities in cells, includ- to the free energy of a protein whereas the horizontal axis reflects the
ing roles in catalysis, structure, interactions and signal transduction. diversity of protein conformations, with similar conformations being
To achieve this array of functions, proteins fold into specific enabling situated in proximity to each other along the horizontal axis (Fig. 1a).
structures or ensembles, for example, to bring together a stereospe- In its simplest form, the folding landscape exhibits a smooth funnel
cific catalytic site or to achieve structural compatibility with binding shape. The broad upper portion of the funnel encompasses numerous
partners. In the cell, protein folding fidelity is safeguarded by the pro- diverse unfolded conformations characterized by high free energy.
tein homeostasis network, which includes molecular chaperones and By contrast, the lowest point represents the distinctive native confor-
degradation pathways. During ageing, the capacity to maintain protein mation, which possesses the lowest free energy. The energy landscape
homeostasis declines1,2; a diverse group of human diseases share an smoothly converges from top to bottom due to the progressive forma-
underlying failure of protein folding. The consequence of misfolding tion of native-like interactions, thereby increasingly favouring the
can be limited to the loss of function of the misfolded protein, as is the native state of the protein. This situation corresponds to the original
case in cystic fibrosis3,4. However, misfolded polypeptides can clump thermodynamic postulate24 (also referred to as Anfinsen’s dogma25)
together to form larger assemblies, called aggregates. These aggregates stating that protein folding occurs spontaneously because the native
can trigger cellular stress, leading to dysfunction and, eventually, death; conformation of a protein represents its most stable but also kinetically
that is, they mediate a toxic gain of function. accessible state.
Amyloid fibrils are ordered, insoluble protein aggregates that have In reality, proteins often undergo folding processes involving
a direct role in many pathologies, each characterized by the proteins intermediate states and encounter rate-limiting steps influenced by
deposited and the tissues affected4,5. They underlie many neurodegen- local structural propensities and hydrophobic collapse26. Furthermore,
erative disorders, such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and not all folding intermediates contribute to productive protein fold-
frontotemporal dementia4,5. Amyloids can also affect other tissues, ing, as some can misfold by forming non-native interactions27,28. As
for instance in the case of type 2 diabetes mellitus, or cause systemic a result, the energy landscapes representing protein folding exhibit a
forms of disease, such as in the case of immunoglobulin light chain ‘rugged’ rather than smooth appearance (Fig. 1a). Protein misfolding
amyloidosis or transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis6 (see Supplementary also causes proteins to stray away from their original native folding
Table 1). The transfer of amyloid fragments, typically referred to as trajectory. When misfolded proteins interact this eventually leads to
‘seeds’, from one organism to another is often sufficient to cause further aggregation. On protein energy landscapes this is illustrated by the
aggregation of the normal protein in the recipient by recruitment to presence of a ‘dark side’ in which proteins become trapped in energy
the growing amyloids7,8. The pathological relevance of this observation minima-associated aggregated protein conformations. Protein folding
remains under debate for many proteins, but has wide support in the reactions are therefore much more complex than initially anticipated
case of the prion diseases (from proteinaceous infectious particles), by the thermodynamic postulate. Protein energy landscape theory
which are a group of fatal, neurodegenerative diseases caused by the revealed that the fundamental reason underlying the kinetic com-
abnormal form of the Prion protein9. To add to the complexity, cells plexity of protein folding stems from structural frustration. This con-
also exploit amyloid fibrils as functional entities to provide physical cept suggests that the local structural propensities of protein chains
support, to regulate activity and as compact states in which temporary might not always align with — and sometimes even oppose — the native
storage of protein and peptide hormones is supported prior to release conform ation, resulting in a rugged energy landscape with multiple
or under stress conditions4,10,11 (Box 1). local minima affecting the efficiency of protein folding. Structural
Methodological advances have expanded our view of the biologi- frustration is probably unavoidable owing to non-aligning selective
cal activity of amyloids. Time-resolved and single-molecule approaches pressures for function, folding and expression levels (among others).
have helped in reaching a better understanding of the kinetics and ther- As a result, molec ular chaperones29 play a vital role in guiding proteins
modynamics of amyloid formation, such as the rates and pathways of through the folding landscape, facilitating the avoidance or resolution
aggregation and the energetics of different amyloid conformations12,13. of unproductive conformations, thereby achieving productive folding30.
Transcriptomics and proteomics have enabled characterization of An additional challenge to the original thermodynamic postulate
amyloid species in complex biological matrices, enabling the study results from protein supersaturation. Supersaturation occurs when
of the diversity and specificity of amyloid formation14–16. Information a solute (here a protein) stays in solution for an extended period at a
derived from high-resolution methods17–19 is now reaching levels that concentration exceeding its solubility limit at equilibrium. It has been
support the deduction of structure–activity relationships20,21. argued that the physiological expression levels of proteins are often
In this Review, we provide an update regarding the thermodynamic close to, and sometimes supersede, their solubility limit31. In this view,
and kinetic principles of amyloid formation and their relation to pro- under physiological conditions the aggregated state of many proteins
tein folding and misfolding. We highlight key molecular drivers and is thermodynamically more favourable than the native state32. Super-
discuss their relevance to end-stage amyloid structures. We discuss saturation is proposed to give rise to a metastable sub-proteome, which
mechanisms of toxicity, focusing on the effect of amyloid interactions becomes particularly susceptible to aggregation during ageing33 and
with cellular components, and the association of aggregation with disease34–36 (Box 2). Finally, proteins start to fold and assemble while
healthy ageing and pathology. still being translated on the ribosome. Co-translational folding affects
the kinetics of the process, as conformational information is added
Theories of protein folding and misfolding as the polypeptide chain elongates, and therefore requires chaperones
Protein folding does not proceed by random conformational sampling22. for proper folding37–39.
Instead, protein sequences have been shaped by natural selection so Thus, although protein folding is evolutionarily shaped by ther-
that protein folding converges on the functional conformation23. Pro- modynamic principles, the kinetic complexities arising from structural
tein folding reactions are often conceptually described in terms of the frustration and the reliance on cellular machinery often challenge the
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 913

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
thermodynamic hypothesis38. This point has been illustrated in detail aggregation-prone regions (APRs) that favour intermolecular β-sheet
in a study of the folding pathway of tubulin, which interacts with the self-assembly into amyloid-like aggregates4 (Fig. 1c). APRs are found
chaperones prefoldin and TRiC40. In contrast to the GroEL/ES chap- widely across proteins, regardless of their structural class18,45–47 (see
erone (whose inner chamber primarily provides a secluded environ- Supplementary Table 1) and can be predicted computationally (Box 3):
ment for proteins to fold in41,42, called an Anfinsen cage43), the folding on average, ~20% of residues in globular domains reside within APRs.
trajectory of tubulin is shaped by guiding cross-interactions with the APRs are prevalent in transmembrane proteins (Fig. 1b), due to
TriC chamber, to the extent that it cannot fold independently of TriC40. the high hydrophobicity of their transmembrane-spanning domain.
Overall, the presence of structural frustration, supersaturation, Conversely, given that the absence of cooperative folding stems from
co-translational folding and the reliance on chaperones44 highlight the their lack of sufficient hydrophobic amino acids, the number of APRs
crucial role of kinetic control in cellular protein folding. This interplay in IDPs is substantially lower48. However, many IDPs still require a
of kinetic effects, pathological interactions and structural frustra- degree of local structure propensity49, often at interaction sites requir-
tion in the amyloid conformation is also likely involved in amyloid ing some degree of hydrophobicity, and hence harbour APRs50–52
polymorphism (discussed below), again resulting in a rugged energy (Fig. 1b). Owing to their increased exposure, APRs in disordered
landscape (Fig. 1a). regions of proteins are particularly susceptible to self-assembly53,
which probably explains why several proteins at the centre of major
Links between conformational stability and amyloidosis diseases — such as the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) and tau
aggregation for Alzheimer disease, and α-synuclein (αS) for Parkinson disease —
Protein architectures can be categorized in four main classes: globular are intrinsically disordered (see Supplementary Table 1). Molecular
soluble proteins, fibrous proteins, transmembrane proteins and intrin- dynamics simulations indicate that the conformational conversion
sically disordered proteins (IDPs). Globular proteins are stabilized by of IDPs towards an organized structure through aggregation or upon
amphipathic α-helices and β-sheets that assemble to form a hydropho- binding to functional partners follows a rugged energy landscape
bic core. Often these secondary structural elements are fully buried, that is not dictated by a global minimum, such as in the case of folded
which is why most primary sequences harbour short hydrophobic proteins, and makes them prone to parallel oligomerization pathways
segments (six to ten residues). These segments are essential for the and amyloid formation54. Interconversion from an inert intrinsically
stability of the hydrophobic core (Fig. 1b); however, they also constitute disordered monomer to an aggregate-compatible compact monomer
Box 1
Functional amyloids
Functional amyloids have interesting properties that can be and RIPK3 proteins and contain an unusual ladder of alternating
employed in biological systems10 (see Supplementary Table 1). For serines and cysteines236. Antimicrobial sequences expressed by
example, amyloid filaments are often used as a structural support amphibians form fibrils that can conformationally switch from a
or as protective layers333–337. During hormone secretion, amyloid typical cross-β fold to an α-helical fibril arrangement when found in
aggregation acts as a temporary storage of polypeptide material the presence of membranes300.
prior to secretion338,339. Finally, amyloid aggregation is a modification Functional amyloids are also primarily characterized by largely
of the functional state of a protein that can be employed to encode hydrophilic cores, in contrast to the majority of pathological
molecular memory through faithful templating, such as in the case amyloids349. The hnRNPDL ribonucleoprotein (involved in
of the yeast prions340, and also in terms of synaptic memory, as shown transcription and RNA-processing) forms non-toxic fibrils that bind
in the Drosophila brain341. nucleic acids350; their core consists of highly hydrophilic residues
Early structural evidence indicated that functional amyloids form incorporating several water channels. The low complexity domain
continuous ‘cross-β’-like structures such as β-helices or β-solenoids, of hnRNPA2 also forms fibrils with a hydrophilic core but further
thus diversifying structurally from their pathological counterparts342. introduces backbone kinks that facilitate the formation of reversible
The repetitive nature of sequences involved in the formation of hydrogels containing hnRNPA2 fibrils351. Orb2, a synaptic translation
functional amyloids was proposed to support this conformation, regulator involved in memory, forms amyloid folds with a core
with successive rungs corresponding to individual or sets of repeats consisting of glutamines and histidines in a pH-sensitive mechanism,
that are capped at their ends342–346. Early NMR-derived structures suggesting that these fibrils might also have a dynamic nature352.
of the HET-s prion validated this notion141, similar to cryo electron This reversible property extends to β-solenoids, as in the case of
microscopy (cryo-EM) results and previous modelling work revealing β-endorphin fibrils353, which are stored in acidic secretory granules
that the major curli subunit (which is the primary scaffold for the and retain a glutamate residue in a critical protonated state in their
formation of bacterial biofilms) adopts a canonical β-solenoid core; on exocytosis, the pH change promotes the release of the
fold347,348. However, more recent structural findings have shown that peptide hormone in the blood in a stepwise manner354. Together,
functional amyloid scaffolds are much more complex than previously these findings suggest that functional amyloids utilize atypical
considered. This complexity is particularly evident for short sequence amyloid folds that promote the stacking of polar and charged side
segments. For example, the necrosome complex is composed of chains to promote their functionality and reversibility, in contrast to
heterotypic amyloid fibrils that are formed by the homologous RIPK1 the rigid hydrophobic packing of their pathological counterparts349.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 914

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
i Spontaneous ii Rugged iii Aggregation iv Chaperones v Supersaturation vi Polymorphism
folding landscapes
Folding Misfolding β-Aggregation Polymorph a Polymorph b
state has been proposed to occur for multiple IDPs55–57, and lipid interac- of neighbouring domain copies incorporated in fibrous proteins61.
tions with disordered monomers might also progress to pathology58. Neighbouring domains sharing high sequence similarity are more
Similar interactions have been suggested to lead to membrane dis- prone to amorphous aggregation61,62 because they can expose iden-
ruption induced by amyloid-like aggregates formed by IDPs59. This tical APRs in proximity, thus increasing their susceptibility to
rapid interconversion and compaction of IDPs might be countered aggregate, exchange identical segments between domains or form
by interactions with solvent molecules that counter-intuitively retain self-recognition contacts that introduce frustration in their energy
IDPs in an expanded conformation in aqueous solutions60. Finally, landscape and entropically favour misfolding compared with native
transient misfolding events occur frequently between tandem repeats folding63.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 915
ygrenE
ygrenE
a
Conformation
b Binding site APR c Unfolded state
Gatekeepers
Disordered regions
Entropic bristles
Transmembrane
Core APR
APR
Aggregated state
Chaperone
Hydrophobic
Positive
Negative
Polar
Native state
Intriniscally disordered Transmembrane Globular domain Conformation
domain domain
Fig. 1 | The role of frustration and aggregation-prone regions in protein is protein supersaturation. Under physiological conditions, the aggregated state
folding and aggregation. a, Protein folding reactions are often conceptually of many proteins is thermodynamically more favourable than the native state32
described in terms of the so-called free-energy landscape, whereby the vertical (panel v). The interplay of kinetic effects, pathological interactions and structural
axis corresponds to the free energy of a protein whereas the horizontal axis frustration is also likely involved in amyloid polymorphism, again resulting in a
reflects the diversity of protein conformations. In its simplest form, the folding rugged energy landscape (panel vi). b, Essential states of functional proteins in
landscape exhibits a smooth funnel shape (panel i). The energy landscape cells. Owing to structural and functional requirements, ~20% of natural protein
smoothly converges from top to bottom due to the progressive formation sequences comprise hydrophobic segments (fewer in intrinsically disordered
of native-like interactions, thereby increasingly favouring the native state of proteins (IDPs)). Following this principle, aggregation-prone regions (APRs)
the protein. In reality, proteins often undergo folding processes involving are integral factors that facilitate the folding of soluble protein domains and
intermediate states and encounter rate-limiting steps. As a result, the energy frequently occur in transmembrane domains or as binding surfaces in IDPs.
landscapes representing protein folding exhibit a ‘rugged’ rather than smooth These segments generally adopt a regular secondary structure in native
appearance (panel ii). Protein misfolding also causes proteins to stray away from structural ensembles. c, Negative selection and chaperones provide kinetic
their original native folding trajectory, illustrated by the presence of a side of the control over APRs. Natural selection favours native-like folding by minimizing
energy funnel where proteins become trapped in energy minima associated with the effect of APRs. Elements of negative design opposing aggregation include
aggregated protein conformations (panel iii). Molecular chaperones play a vital gatekeeper residues or entropic bristles. Structural frustration due to APRs is
role in guiding proteins through the folding landscape, facilitating the avoidance controlled by both negative selection and chaperones.
or resolution of unproductive conformations (panel iv). An additional challenge

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
The determining role of APRs for protein aggregation has been are thermodynamically correlated, as mutations that destabilize the
recapitulated by many studies, starting with mutational analysis46,64,65 amyloid state often also destabilize the native structure74,76. Secondly,
and grafting experiments, in which cloning of an APR derived from an the universal genetic code is conservative with regard to both protein
aggregation-prone protein into another, typically non-amyloidogenic structure and aggregation propensity, as many single base pair sub-
sequence is enough to induce amyloid formation66,67. Several studies stitutions result in conservative substitutions that preserve protein
have demonstrated their ability to assemble in isolation45, as well as stability77, but also tend to conserve protein aggregation74,78.
their ability to induce aggregation of the full-length protein when An alternative thought-provoking perspective suggests that amy-
added as peptides in cis formation68–71. As such, APRs probably consti- loid propensity in present-day proteins may have its roots in ancient
tute the most common occurrence of structural frustration in proteins protein structures. Indeed, the amyloid-first hypothesis proposes that
whereby local propensity for amyloid-like aggregation competes with prebiotic amyloid peptides gave rise to the universe of current protein
and opposes global native structure. topologies79,80. In this view, regions with amyloid propensity persist in
Despite being a result of protein architecture, the intrinsic ten- contemporary proteins as remnants of this primordial influence. Inter-
dency of proteins to aggregate, particularly through APRs, poses chal- estingly, amyloid peptides have demonstrated the ability to spontane-
lenges to cellular proteostasis and contributes to disease. So why, then, ously emerge81 and propagate82 in prebiotic conditions, bind RNA83,
has aggregation not been eliminated by natural selection? One reason interact with lipid membranes84 and harbour catalytic function85.
is that mutations that destabilize the native state of proteins often
lead to increased aggregation propensity72. Proteins from extremo- Kinetic partitioning of the native state
philes provide an illustrative example of the seemingly paradoxical The native state of most proteins is a metastable state that is protected
nature of APRs: although these proteins exhibit increased resistance from misfolded and aggregated states through kinetic partitioning
to thermal denaturation, they harbour more (rather than fewer) APRs (Fig. 1a,c). For proper function, the rate of folding to the native state
owing to their more hydrophobic cores73,74. Conversely, the selec- must be higher than the rate of aggregation at physiological concen-
tive pressure of Hsp90 deletion on proteins of Hsp90-dependent trations, and the rate of unfolding should be sufficiently slow so that
viruses results in less aggregation-prone, but also less stable, proteins75. the native state remains stable throughout the biological lifetime of the
These findings demonstrate the intricate relationship between protein protein. From an energy landscape perspective, the barriers between
aggregation and stability. Moreover, native and amyloid structures the native state and aggregated states need to be sufficiently high
Box 2
Supersaturation
Supersaturation refers to a concentration of a solute that exceeds its Proteome analyses of the composition of inclusions derived from
solubility limit, which is defined as its concentration at equilibrium in patients with myopathy revealed a similar metastable proteome that
the same given conditions. This idea extends to parts of the proteome might be linked to muscle motor dysfunction360. The importance of
expressed at levels beyond their solubility, a condition that sets these the protein quality control machinery in keeping such metastable
proteins at high risk of aggregation and requires strict proteostatic subpopulations in line is undeniable. This premise questions,
control35. High local concentrations have been suggested to shift however, whether supersaturation is a driving force of ageing or vice
Anfinsen’s postulate from favouring intramolecular interactions versa. Are proteins that are expressed beyond their solubility a threat
and natural folding towards conditions promoting intermolecular during early life when protein quality control is not yet compromised?
contacts and assembly355. Aggregation-prone proteins, for which There are arguments to be made to counter this notion. For instance,
the solubility barrier is lower, are particularly susceptible to this mass spectrometry data in Caenorhabditis elegans revealed that
shift355,356. The environmental context also influences the levels most proteins are expressed above their limits of solubility and
of protein susceptibility, as conditions reducing the solubility that their monitoring is lost as a result of the functional decline
barrier of proteins — such as membrane interactions or charge of the machinery due to ageing361. Gene co-expression analysis
neutralization — can promote their assembly in a salting out-like identified the endosomal–lysosomal and ubiquitin–proteasome
process56. Regardless, supersaturation as a general mechanism systems as key pathways promoting clearance and preventing
has been suggested to drive massive aggregation and increased massive proteostatic collapse in Alzheimer disease362. On the other
cellular vulnerability in major neurodegenerative disorders35,357. hand, it is also possible that supersaturation drives cell ageing
In fact, specific pathways enriched in supersaturated proteins are by compromising proteostasis. Impairment of certain molecular
downregulated in Alzheimer disease brains to mitigate massive chaperones exacerbated the widespread collapse of a metastable
subproteomic collapse in conditions of compromised proteostasis358. proteome induced when targeting the activity of ATM and DNA
Supporting this finding, single-cell transcriptomics and subcellular topoisomerases363. In line with this, loss of chaperone-mediated
proteomics uncovered an enrichment of metastable proteins related autophagy in mice was shown to alter neuronal function by
to synaptic function and mitochondrial energy metabolism in protein synergistically promoting collapse of a metastable proteome and
inclusions related to neurodegeneration, thus providing a traceable increasing cellular vulnerability to aggregation toxicity94.
pattern for selective vulnerability of neurons to aggregates359.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 916

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Box 3
The impact of artificial intelligence
Significant advances have been made in protein structure prediction to the field of protein design by generating new sequences with
with the introduction of state-of-the-art artificial intelligence-based predictable functionality, thereby showcasing the potential for further
methods. One notable milestone was the arrival of AlphaFold, which advancements.
employs established structural knowledge from the Protein Data Despite the advances made in predicting protein folding and
Bank (PDB) and co-evolutionary sequence analysis derived from function, the daunting task of predicting protein aggregation remains
multiple-sequence alignments364. Through training a deep neural exceptionally challenging, even for artificial intelligence-based
network to predict pairwise distances between residues in random methods378. Protein aggregation defies the influence of evolutio-
sequences, AlphaFold successfully unveiled the structural folds nary pressure that shapes sequences, which is the foundation of
of 98.5% of human proteins, including novel folds not previously such sequence-based methods. Additionally, the morphological
observed364. The efficacy of AlphaFold was independently validated adaptability of amyloids surpasses Anfinsen’s dogma, which states
by a following collaborative study365 and although its performance that a particular structure is encoded by a single sequence.
is less successful for dynamic regions, other studies demonstrated The example of AlphaFold clearly demonstrates that achieving
that when combined with NMR or molecular dynamics-derived reliable prediction capabilities necessitates a much larger ensemble
parameters, it can be utilized to predict protein dynamics and of structural information. Despite the remarkable progress made by
flexibility366,367. Moreover, when integrated with experimental cryo-EM and solid-state NMR in determining the structure of fibril
data from crystallography or cryo electron microscopy (cryo-EM), aggregates, we are still some distance away from attaining such
AlphaFold substantially improved protein modelling quality levels of prediction accuracy. However, the increased availability of
and coverage368. Additional methods, such as RoseTTAFold369, amyloid structures has spurred the development of computational
ColabFold370 and trRosettaX-Single371, have emerged to enhance user approaches that focus on analysing the stability and factors that
accessibility, speed and accuracy of predictions for protein folding govern protein aggregation18,20,21. In this light, machine learning
and complex formation. There has also been a focus on expanding has made considerable advances in predicting the propensity for
structure predictions to macromolecular protein complexes372,373, aggregation based on the protein sequence52,379,380, as well as for the
although accurate predictions for asymmetric complexes remain breakdown of aggregation kinetics381. Additionally, machine learning
challenging374. Furthermore, ongoing efforts aim to predict protein– has shown promise in the field of medical diagnosis and amyloid
cofactor interactions375 and nucleic acid conformations376. Lastly, disease classification382–384.
large language models, such as ProGen377, offer substantial benefits
(Fig. 1c). In fact, proteins with a short life span are enriched in protein metastable neuronal proteins that are at risk of aggregation94. Tau
deposition diseases72 as their turnover becomes dysregulated with acetylation reroutes degradation towards macroautophagy and endo-
age due to a decline in protein degradation86. Kinetic partitioning is somal microautophagy but also enhances tau prion-like transmission,
achieved by both protein intrinsic and extrinsic factors. which is considered important for the spreading of the pathology
through the brain95. Chaperones also differentially interact with pro-
Extrinsic factors tein aggregate species formed during the aggregation process96 to
The most well-known extrinsic factors are molecular chaperones87, block or disassemble protein aggregates97. Single-particle analysis of
which favour native protein folding, prevent misfolding, mediate ClpB-mediated disaggregation revealed that it is a dynamic and fast
degradation and reverse aggregation. A full overview is beyond the process, with substrates refolding after exiting the pore at rates of
scope of this Review, but we mention a few highlights. For example, 500 residues per second98. However, chaperone-mediated amyloid
the different client-binding mechanisms of the Hsp70 family allow disassembly can also backfire if amyloid fragments (seeds) rather than
for the adaptable functionality of this hub chaperone, which can monomers are produced; each fragment can start a new aggregation
ATP-dependently stabilize or unfold protein structures and prevent reaction (in a process called seeding, see below), as observed in the case
aggregation by safeguarding both partially folded and unfolded protein of Hsp70 and tau amyloid fibrils99 or during the cooperative action of
chains88. This plasticity is further regulated by co-chaperone activity, DNAJB1 and Hsp70 in disassembling αS fibrils100.
such as with Hsp40 (ref. 89). Another example of this cooperativity is The other external factor affecting kinetic partitioning of the
in αS, for which six divergent chaperones recognize a motif around native state is translation dynamics101, in which variations in tRNA
Tyr39; notably, phosphorylation abrogates their activity, providing abundance and compatibility with the ribosome binding site lead to
a potential link for this post-translational modification in Parkinson differential translation speeds for different codons102,103. Because the
disease90. Chaperone-mediated native folding can be catalysed even genetic code is redundant (that is, multiple codons code for the same
under non-equilibrium conditions through ATP consumption91. amino acid), the same sequence can be translated at different rates
Chaperone-mediated autophagy is another important pathway depending on the codons103. Because translation is slower than protein
contributing to degradation of misfolded and aggregated species92. folding by several orders of magnitude, an idea gaining traction is that
For example, DJ-1 and Hsc70 mediate autophagy of αS93 and other the non-uniform usage of codons in organisms (bias) is an adaptation
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 917

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
to optimize the translation rate in favour of native folding104,105. Evi- case of MPS2, an amyloidogenic protein expressed by Plasmodium
dence for this idea includes the following: hydrophobic cores (thus falciparum126. Apart from inhibiting aggregation, such regions can also
also APRs) tend to be enriched in optimal codons106; there seems to act as ‘entropic bristles’, which are intrinsically disordered or highly
be a bias in secondary structural preference of codon usage107; ribo- charged short sequences that increase sequence entropy and sweep
somal pausing sites in interdomain regions are proposed to enable out a large area through water interactions or random movements127,128.
folding between domains104; and ribosomal pausing allows time for As such, entropic bristles increase the fragility of fibrils and tune the
chaperone binding108. Codon bias is thought to be one of the reasons seeding efficiency of aggregates by generating a larger number of
why non-synonymous mutations can affect protein structure and short prion-competent fragments129; they can also simply modify the
function107,109. Moreover, at least in yeast, ribosomal pausing becomes resulting morphology of aggregates formed by APRs130.
dysregulated with age110. Notably, translation dynamics probably syner-
gizes with interactions between the nascent chain and the ribosome111, The amyloid state and polymorphism
as well as ribosome-associated chaperones, such as NAC112. With the establishment of structure determination methods for
proteins in the amyloid state and the increasing number of available
Intrinsic factors structures, we have gained insight into the remarkable polymorphism
To promote kinetic partitioning, evolution has selectively enhanced the exhibited by these structures. Several protein sequences have been
presence of aggregation gatekeepers113,114, which are a distinct group observed to adopt multiple distinct amyloid structures17,131,132. The ori-
of residues that counteract aggregation. Gatekeepers achieve this by gins and implications of this polymorphism are a subject of debate, but
employing charge repulsion (for example, aspartate, glutamic acid, it probably arises from the fact that these structures are not products of
arginine and lysine) or discouraging aggregate structure (proline). evolutionary selection. Consequently, numerous similar energy minima
They are typically found at the amino and carboxy-terminal flanks coexist within the amyloid energy folding landscape (Fig. 1a). A compel-
of APRs at the first position at which the polypeptide chain emerges ling argument supporting this notion is that functional amyloids, which
sufficiently from the hydrophobic core to accommodate placement have evolved towards the amyloid state, are largely monomorphic even
of a charged residue115. Aggregation gatekeepers also occur in the under non-physiological conditions133.
middle of APRs in polypeptide sequences, effectively suppressing
the local aggregation propensity and leaving only cryptic APRs116 (that The ultrastructure of protein aggregates
is, weakly aggregating APRs that have a higher content of polar and The ultrastructure of protein aggregates varies considerably, rang-
charged residues48,52). Cryptic APRs are more prevalent in IDPs than in ing from cases involving the self-assembly of native-like folds134 or 3D
globular proteins because of fewer structural constraints48. Gatekeeper domain-swapped models135 to primarily α-helical136 or (most often)
conservation correlates with the aggregation propensity of the APR, enriched in β-strands. The latter also form a spectrum of morphologies
and this conservation comes at a cost to protein stability, suggesting ranging from amorphous inclusions137 to curly fibrils130,138 to highly
that aggregation gatekeepers form an additional class of functional ordered amyloid structures. What differentiates the highly ordered
residues117,118. The codon bias of aggregation gatekeepers differs from amyloid structure from less ordered forms of β-aggregation is unclear,
the average for the proteome; in addition, conservation of aggregation given the latter still evades structural determination. Amyloid deposits
gatekeepers occurs at the codon level, not the amino acid level, sug- in cells and tissues consist of long non-branched fibrous assemblies
gesting a role in co-translational protein folding117. Negatively charged of thousands of peptides with a width of about 6–12 nm and lengths of
aggregation gatekeepers are the more potent suppressors of aggrega- up to several micrometres. Amyloid fibrils have a rope-like architec-
tion; however, their short side chains restrict their usage to the surface ture composed of one or several protofilaments intertwined laterally
of globular proteins115. The longer, positively charged gatekeepers along the fibril axis. The ultrastructure of amyloid fibrils often adopts
are more easily accommodated in the hydrophobic core but are less a regular helical twist, but many also display a more planar ribbon-like
efficient aggregation inhibitors115. As a result, charged aggregation structure. Successive advances in X-ray diffraction139, crystallography45,
gatekeepers seem to constitute a code for chaperone interaction: sev- solid-state NMR140,141 and cryo electron microscopy (cryo-EM)142 have
eral major chaperones, such as Hsp70, have a strong affinity for APRs revolutionized structure acquisition and vastly improved resolu-
flanked by positively charged aggregation gatekeepers115. Notably, tion. Together these efforts have greatly advanced our understand-
DAXX, a polyD/E protein, has been identified as a chaperone with a ing of the amyloid fold, resulting in an explosion in high-resolution
high affinity for positive charges119. structures19. These atomic resolution structures confirm that amyloids
The wider flanking regions surrounding APRs have additional form their own class of protein assemblies sharing a distinct ‘cross-β’
modulatory effects as well120. The mechanism of action of MOAG4/ architecture139,143 that is not observed in other protein architectures4,5.
SERF, a known modifier of proteotoxicity121,122, falls into this category. We now have unprecedented detail on the structure of protofibrils
MOAG binds to negatively charged residue clusters distal from APRs and how they assemble into amyloid fibrils, thereby unveiling the struc-
on aggregation-prone proteins and expedites aggregation into inclu- tural origin of polymorphism. Importantly, structures of patient-derived
sions, thereby limiting toxicity of the aggregation process to the cell123. fibrils have revealed the association of specific polymorphs to particular
An α-helical region preceding the aggregation-prone polyQ track pathologies142. Aβ forms two distinct polymorphs associated with
42
of Ataxin 7 stabilizes the latter in a helical conformation and sup- familial Alzheimer disease (fAD) and sporadic Alzheimer disease (sAD)144
presses aggregation64,124 (see Supplementary Table 1). The central tau (Fig. 2), whereas tau forms ultrastructural polymorphs that are classified
306VQIVYK311 aggregation motif (see Supplementary Table 1) is locked in between different tauopathies and share several different protofilament
a β-hairpin-like compact structure by its N-terminal flanking region that folds145–147. αS forms distinct fibrils in multiple system atrophy (MSA) and
prevents aggregation; alternative splicing or disease-related mutations Parkinson disease148,149. Notably, these structures are not representative
alter the modulating capacity of this upstream element125. Disordered of αS fibrils formed in vitro, which differ even further when incorpo-
flanking regions can have an inhibitory effect on APRs, as shown in the rating disease mutations and post-translational modifications150,151.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 918

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
sAD type I filaments fAD type II filaments Alzheimer disease-seeded filaments
S D H D
G E Q V A
K N V A K H E
G I F V A F L F
G Y I A V A M I G L F V L G K Q H H E D E V F I V G I L M V G E R V D S H S G Y [ (A PD β 4 B 0 : ) 2M4J]
E [PD H B:7 V H Q4 V B Q ] K G G L V V F L F G M I I G A V G A V V I Y G V I G S A K N G G K A A S V I V G K V L A F F D L G I K G A V N V E G H V G Q H K
(Aβ 42 ) A V N K G V A N G Q V G I M V L V
E D G S G M I I V D H H G G M G L F A
V G V F E V F E
∆∆G per residue stability V L H H L Q K F A S Y G S N E K G V A V I I L G M G V I V A G I K N S G D D V R F A
–4 –2 kcal mol–1 0 2 [ (A PD β 4 B 2 : ) 7 Q4M] E H F R D V G E D F A V F L V K Q G H H V E Y G S H E D
D
A
Fig. 2 | Structural determinants are shared between polymorphic amyloid in small amounts from fAD and sAD cases, respectively144. Fibrils prepared
fibril structures. Representations of one cross-sectional layer of polymorphic in vitro after seeding Aβ with extracts from patients with Alzheimer disease
40
amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) fibril cores extracted from the brains of patients with resulted in the formation of filaments with a distinct amyloid core (right panel).
different pathologies or post in vitro amplification (seeding). Structure (type I Individual residues are shown as circles and colour-coded based on the per
filaments) corresponding to the primary fold isolated from the brains of patients residue energetic contribution to overall fibril stability. A single protofilament
with sporadic Alzheimer disease (sAD) (left panel). Structure comprising two is highlighted in each case, together with transparent laterally packed identical
S-shaped packed protofilaments (type II filaments), mostly found in the brains protofilaments. Values were obtained from Stamp-DB, a public repository for
of patients with familial Alzheimer disease (fAD) (middle panel). The latter was the structural and thermodynamic classification of amyloid structures19. Despite
extracted also from several other pathologies, including patients with ageing- their evident structural variability, different polymorphs share overlapping
related tau astrogliopathy, Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and energetic frameworks composed of similar stabilizing sequence segments. PDB,
frontotemporal dementia. Similarly, type I and type II filaments were recovered Protein Data Bank.
Polymorphism has also been confirmed for TDP-43 (ref. 152) and PrP153, in vitro assembly of tau polymorphs resembling disease-specific poly-
as well as in localized154,155 and systemic forms of amyloidosis, including morphs is possible but highly dependent on buffer conditions, tau con-
ATTR amyloidosis156, serum amyloid A (SAA) amyloidosis157 and light struct lengths and conditions of incubation, such as shaking171,172. The
chain amyloidosis158. Conformational variants of various amyloids contrast between seemingly conserved disease polymorphs in patients
have been shown to stably self-propagate in cellular systems via the and the variability of in vitro amyloids suggests that the pathological
recruitment of soluble protein to the aggregates, and are character- conditions under which disease polymorphs emerge also reflect very
ized by diverse progression rates and distribution patterns159–162. As a specific pathophysiological contexts. Factors influencing polymorphic
result, they are often referred to as prion-like strains and are invariably bias include disease-associated mutations161 and tissue or cell-specific
associated with different diseases, thus enabling accurate hierarchical proteolysis173. Notably, post-translational modifications also have a
classification of pathologies based on fibril structure131. significant role in this process. For instance, charge neutralization by
Although amyloid structure seems to be stable across patients acetylation of lysine chains in tau and phosphorylation (Tyr39) of αS
sharing the same pathology, it is also clear that amyloids are extremely favour β-stacking interactions150,174. Additionally, ubiquitin incorpo-
sensitive to environmental conditions. For example, distinct strains ration has been proposed to alter protofilament packing in tau poly-
formed by Aβ form at later stages of Down syndrome, suggesting that morphs in corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and Alzheimer disease174.
the convergence of ageing and disease-specific factors can dictate the Patient-derived amyloid structures are often associated with undefined
formation of characteristic amyloid strains163. Cryo-EM studies of non-proteinaceous electron densities filling internal cavities or deco-
in vitro-prepared amyloid fibrils of tau and αS have shown that addi- rating surfaces of unknown origin, although they are suspected to be
tives such as heparin or nucleic acids can substantially alter amy- lipids or polyions of some sort142.
loid structure164–166, in a similar lateral mode of binding shown for
amyloid-specific dyes167. Faithful in vitro propagation of ex vivo poly- Structural determinants of amyloid stability
morphs is challenging: although SAA patient-derived polymorphs With hundreds of atomic resolution amyloid structures available, we
seem to seed accurately in vitro168, this is not the case for αS169,170. Finally, can now identify general trends and properties determining amyloid
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 919

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
structure stability18,20. One observation is that functional amyloids are through conventional methods (Fig. 4a). This process can be acceler-
generally associated with lower stability than disease-related fibrils ated by heterogeneous interactions (for example, with lipids180) that
(Box 1). Another immediate observation is that amyloid core struc- increase the local concentration of monomers and significantly speed
tures do not always consist of full-length proteins171,175 but, rather, up monomer conversion. Liquid–liquid phase separation has also been
protein fragments. This observation suggests that large segments suggested to favour amyloid nucleation. Liquid–liquid phase separa-
of protein sequences are not compatible with the amyloid state. tion involves the formation of liquid droplets, which again facilitates
Non-core segments constitute the fuzzy coat53,145 or are removed alto- nucleation by increasing local protein concentrations.
gether by proteolysis. Removal of non-core segments seems to enhance Secondary nucleation is differentiated from primary nucleation
amyloid stability, probably by exposing amyloidogenic fragments and by the fact that it occurs on the lateral surfaces of already formed fibrils
removing incompatible ones176. and is catalysed by these surfaces. As lateral surface areas increase
Amyloid core structures are not uniformly stable upon inspection. with fibril growth, secondary nucleation is thereby favoured, further
Roughly one third of residues structurally support the cross-β con- accelerating aggregation. The difference in specificity between pri-
formation, whereas another third are frustrated due to unfavourable mary and secondary nucleation is still a matter of debate181. However,
dihedral angles, main chain hydrogen bond geometries or suboptimal data from various studies suggest that secondary nucleation is a less
side chain packing; the final third contribute minimally to the amyloid specific process. For instance, proteome analysis of surface-induced
fold. Structural frustration is mostly segmental and interspersed with co-aggregation in bodily fluids revealed that the composition of
segments forming regular β-strands. Thermodynamic analysis using extracted deposits did not differ substantially. This finding was
empirical force fields such as Rosetta18,21 or FoldX20 confirm these observed despite the bodily fluids being exposed to fibrils with diverse
structural observations, indicating that structurally satisfied segments morphologies derived from different proteins182. Human prolactin
also form stabilizing tertiary side chain interactions within the amyloid and galanin, two proteins that co-localize in the same secretory gran-
protofibril. Comparing different polymorphs of tau, αS or Aβ shows ules yet are dissimilar in terms of the primary sequence, form func-
that the same segments are structurally stabilizing in different protofi- tional co-assemblies through secondary nucleation, countering the
brillar folds forming very similar β-sheets. Not surprisingly, many of notion that secondary nucleation is necessarily sequence-specific183.
these correspond to APRs that have long been known to be crucial for Similarly, S100A9 co-aggregates by coating and reducing the avail-
amyloid assembly, such as PHF6 in tau (306VQIVYK311) or 16KLVFFA21 in ability of the same secondary nucleation surfaces that catalyse Aβ
42
Aβ (Fig. 3a–c; see Supplementary Table 1). self-nucleation184. Positive evidence supporting the specificity of
Protofibrillar polymorphs, therefore, share a common framework secondary nucleation is mostly derived from research on Aβ assem-
of cross-β-favouring segments that are stabilized by alternative tertiary bly. For instance, evidence shows that surface catalysis is selective
side chain interactions. In the case of tau, stabilizing tertiary interactions between Aβ and Aβ (ref. 185) as well as being enantio-specific186.
40 42
are often provided by different framework segments that either pack However, another study indicated that Aβ auto-catalysis occurs inde-
against each other or at the same time also serve as anchor points pro- pendently of surface properties, suggesting that the specificity of
viding stabilizing interactions to structurally variable segments, ena- secondary nucleation for this peptide is driven by the intrinsic propen-
bling these to be integrated in the cross-β core structure20,21,177 (Fig. 3d). sity of the free monomer to adopt a similar amyloid fold under given
The same modularity is also observed in other amyloids including conditions187.
Aβ or αS. Together these observations depict a highly frustrated and Conversely, primary nucleation seems to be highly sensitive to
rugged polymorphic conformational landscape132. Unlike native pro- sequence variation. Thermodynamic analysis of the elongation of
tein folding, kinetic control of this energetic landscape has not been aggregation cores through axial addition of monomers revealed that
shaped by natural selection. Instead, the kinetics of amyloid assembly even a single residue variance accounts for >50% of the resulting
are directed by pathological interactions resulting in disease-specific sequences being structurally incompatible with cross-interactions188.
polymorphic bias. Primary Aβ nucleation is also sensitive to pH variation that alters
net charges, whereas secondary nucleation is unaffected189. Fur-
Kinetic principles of amyloid formation thermore, intramolecular interactions play a crucial role during
Amyloid formation is a complex kinetic process that involves intercon- primary nucleation in facilitating the formation of initial nuclei by
versions between aggregated species in an evolving reaction mixture arranging monomers into a compact and nucleation-compatible
that gradually enriches end-stage amyloids (Fig. 4). Several studies conformation55–57.
have determined the microscopic rates characterizing the key steps in The morphological fidelity of secondary nucleation has also been
amyloid assembly, including primary and secondary nucleation, elon- debated. Structural evidence revealed that αS secondary nucleation
gation, fragmentation, oligomer disassembly and monomer dissocia- is promoted by transient electrostatic interactions that involve the
tion. Nucleation, fibril elongation and fragmentation all contribute to flexible ends of the protein excluded from the aggregation core and
the growth of mature amyloid fibrils and are counteracted by oligomer that these interactions promote the unfolding and local concentra-
disassembly and monomer dissociation178. tion of monomers, suggesting that the structure of the pre-formed
core is not imprinted on the second-generation aggregates190. In fact,
Nucleation amyloid strains formed through secondary nucleation have been
Primary nucleation (that is, the generation of new amyloid species in suggested to be defined primarily by solution conditions rather than
a pure solution of monomers) is entropically unfavourable, resulting the structure of the templated fibrils187,191. Independent studies for
in slow and stochastic growth rates179. It involves the self-assembly of Aβ192 and insulin fibrils193 have also demonstrated that only the fibril
monomers into productive nuclei. Macroscopically, this kinetic step ends faithfully template the morphology of derived aggregates.
results in an initial lag phase representing the time required for the Cryo-EM studies have identified that under conditions conducive to
nuclei to form and grow to levels at which aggregation is detectable templated structure formation, surface nucleation can still catalyse
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 920

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
different morphologies, indicating that secondary nucleation contrib- fluorescence microscopy revealed that under the same conditions,
utes to the increased variability in the formation of amyloid fibrils155. secondary nucleation typically results in the formation of fibrils that
However, observations of single Aβ fibrils using total internal reflection resemble the parent fibril population13.
a b c
385 255
50 375 265
0 365 275
−50
10
−100 355 285
345 295
335
305
325 315
Category type Category type Category type
Alzheimer disease CAA AGD GGT CAA In vitro — Aβ In vitro — E22∆ MSA Polymorph 2a E46K
40
GSS CTE PiD PSP sAD In vitro — Aβ In vitro — D23N MSA-seeded Polymorph 2b Tau-
42
PART CBD In vitro fAD In vitro — Aβ Alzheimer Polymorph 1a H50Q seeded
40/42
disease-seeded Polymorph 1b E46K seeded
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 921
)1–lom
lack(
G∆∆
350VQSKIGSLDNITH362 35MVGGVV40
275VQIINK280 40 140
40 10 5 130 20 20
35 0 120
−20
30
−40
−60 110
30 40
100 29GAIIGL34
50
337VEVKSE342 15
90
25 16KLVFFA21 60
326GNIHHK331 305VQIVYK311 20 80 70
47GVVHGVGVATVA56
)1–lom
lack(
G∆∆
Residue Residue Residue
number number number
25 35EGVLYVG41
0
−25
−50
86GSIAAA91
63VTNVGGAVVTGVTAVAQ79
d Alzheimer disease/PART/GSS/CAA/CTE CBD/AGD/PiD GGT/PSP
VQSK I GSLDN I TH VQSK I GSLDN I TH
GN I HHK VQSK I GSLDN I TH
VEVKSE VQI VYK
VQI VYK
VQI VYK
VQSK I GSLDN I TH VEVKSE
VQI I NK
VQI VYK
VQI I NK
∆∆G per residue stability
–4 –2 0 2
kcal mol–1
)1–lom
lack(
G∆∆
Fig. 3 | Structural determinants stabilize polymorphic amyloid fibril structures. library in R. d, A common framework contributes to the stability of tau fibrils
a–c, Per residue cumulative energetic contributions (y axis) of polymorphic cores derived from different pathologies. APRs form important stacking interactions that
of amyloid fibrils formed by tau (panel a), amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) (panel b) and typically ‘clamp’ together the termini of fibril cores or participate in energetically
α-synuclein (αS) (panel c). Fibril structures used for the energetic calculations are pivotal packing interactions that have been identified by parallel thermodynamic
categorized and colour-coded based on disease relevance for ex vivo structures studies19–21. Cores are colour-coded based on per residue energetic contribution as
and on disease mutations or experimental conditions for recombinantly described previously; chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), Pick’s disease (PiD)
produced fibrils, respectively (as shown in the figure key). Circular histograms, and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) architectures are shown as overlayed
with protein residues shown along the perimeter, highlight that polymorphic transparent structures to highlight common interactions19,20. AGD, argyrophilic
cores share overlapping energy profiles with common stabilizing regions (shaded grain disease; CAA, cerebral amyloid angiopathy; CBD, corticobasal degeneration;
segments) that correspond primarily to previously experimentally determined fAD, familial Alzheimer disease; GGT, globular glial tauopathy; GSS, Gerstmann–
aggregation-prone regions (APRs) of each protein47,160,177, interspersed with regions Straussler–Scheinker disease; MSA, multiple system atrophy; PART, primary
of structural frustration. Circular histograms were generated using the ggplot2 age-related tauopathy; sAD, sporadic Alzheimer disease.

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 922
noitamrof
lirbif/noitagerggA
Oligomers Protofibrils
Plateau phase Amyloid fibrils
Seeded kinetics
Growth phase
Lag phase
Time
noitartnecnoc
seicepS
a Reaction kinetics: typical read-out b Reaction kinetics: reaction mixture
Monomers
Time
c Key species
Unfolded monomer Aggregation competent Oligomer Protofibril Mature fibril
monomer
d Key processes Reaction coordinate
Primary nucleation Secondary nucleation Fragmentation Elongation Dissociation
(surface catalysed)
Fig. 4 | Overview of protein aggregation kinetics and processes that promote the growth of protofilaments and mature fibril aggregates that are
contribute during amyloid fibril formation. a, Mainstay kinetics of amyloid formed through lateral interactions of the former. c, Key species during the
fibril formation (blue line). Kinetics are characterized by a starting lag phase formation of amyloids. d, Key kinetic processes that take place during
during which initial nuclei and ‘on-pathway’ oligomers are formed and the formation of amyloid aggregates. Templating that proceeds through
reach aggregate concentrations that can be monitored in bulk aggregation primary nucleation results in slow and stochastic growth rates179, whereas
assays. This lengthy lag phase can be surpassed by seeded experiments secondary nucleation becomes proportionally faster based on amyloid growth,
(shown by red line) during which pre-formed aggregation nuclei are supplied as it occurs on the surfaces of pre-formed aggregate species. Aggregate
exogenously. This process is followed by a shorter growth phase during growth is then promoted by further incorporation of monomers during
which the rapid recruitment of monomers is catalysed by fibril ends or by elongation, whereas fragmentation, which can occur throughout the kinetic
secondary nucleation on lateral surfaces that overtakes the aggregation process, does not change the number of aggregates but can shift the balance
process. Eventually, the process reaches an equilibrium that appears as a between processes (for instance, primary and secondary nucleation) as it alters
plateau phase in typical read-outs. b, Overlapping presence of different the number of reactive sites by modifying the numbers of reactive species.
species during different phases of aggregation growth. During early phases The dissociation of oligomers does not directly reduce aggregation growth
of nucleation, it has been suggested that monomers adopt a compact but can do so indirectly by replenishing the monomer pool. Similar monomer
aggregation conformation that can gradually lead towards the formation of dissociation can also occur directly from fibril tips.
oligomeric and prefibrillar species. During elongation, these structures can

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Elongation is attributed to mechanical perturbations, sequestration of cellular
Single-molecule observations have shown that fibril elongation for factors and the subsequent activation of inflammatory responses218.
various amyloidogenic proteins (both functional and pathological) Both lateral and axial surfaces of amyloids can engage in interac-
occurs through a stop-and-go mechanism194,195. This process is defined tions with other biomolecules, including charged molecules such as
by growth bursts (of constant rates) with intermittent stationary polyphosphates and polysaccharides, as well as with lipids and other
periods196. Importantly, amyloid elongation might be polar, sug- proteins (Fig. 5a–c).
gesting that fibril tips are not equally reactive in the recruitment of Although the precise identity of many toxic species and their
monomeric proteins to the growing amyloid fibril195,197. This unequal interfaces remains to be fully elucidated, the importance of heterotypic
reactivity has also been attributed to imperfections occurring at fibril interactions in shaping the properties and infectivity of amyloids or
tips, reminiscent of a ‘lock–dock’ mechanism for elongation198 in which promoting their toxic phenotype (see next section) is now firmly estab-
the addition of monomers at fibril tips requires significant structural lished. A prominent example includes the cross-interaction between
rearrangement of the newly added monomer199 as well as of the mol- medin and Aβ, which initiates the vascular deposition of the latter219.
ecules directly in contact at the fibril tip200. Monomer dissociation Synergistic interactions between different disease-associated proteins
from fibril tips has also been observed to occur at rates that supersede (including tau, αS and Aβ) typically exacerbate neuropathology220,221.
incorporation of monomers; however, this balance is dependent on For instance, co-aggregation of β-microglobulin with Aβ promotes
2
the relative monomer concentration201. cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease222. Tau aggregates originating
from PS19 mice provide a compelling illustration of how heterotypic
Fragmentation and dissociation interactions can exert toxicity through various pathways. In reporter
Fragmentation is strongly dependent on environmental conditions, cells, PS19-derived tau seeds impair chaperone activity223, whereas
such as temperature and mechanical pertubations202, but also relies on in mouse models of tauopathy they inactivate histone demethylase
the intrinsic propensities of protein sequences and the morphological LSD1 through sequestration (thus linking tau aggregation to down-
properties of the fibrils203. Fibril stability and length distributions are stream neuro-dysfunction pathways)224. A study of αS pathological
important determinants of fibrillar brittleness204. Fragmentation has polymorphs derived from either glial cytoplasmic deposits or Lewy
also been linked to amyloid toxicity, as it influences cellular uptake of bodies revealed that they are shaped by intracellular milieus and, in
amyloid fragments generated through mechanical fragmentation205. turn, associate with different toxic effects225. Finally, a little considered
This process is associated with the average size of aggregates, which aspect is that amyloid fibril surfaces can have catalytic properties85,226,227
exhibits an inverse correlation with the cellular uptake of amyloids206. (Box 4), which might have biological consequences; for example, fibrils
Fragmentation is also associated with the generation of reverse of Aβ catalyse the hydrolysis of neurotransmitters, such as dopamine
oligomeric species and is suppressed when a critical fibril mass is and adrenaline228.
reached207. These species are usually ‘on-pathway’ as they resemble
the parent fibril structures and can deviate in terms of function, in Amyloids engage in diverse interactions
contrast to oligomers formed directly from monomer nucleation. The fibril tips of amyloids are formed by partially buried hydropho-
Reverse-generated fibrils derived from mechanical fragmentation bic residues of the top rungs18. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the growing
of Aβ amyloid fibrils interact with a central APR of the monomeric ends of amyloids have been identified as the primary cross-interface
form similar to end-state fibrils, whereas oligomers formed during with lipid vesicles229,230. A comprehensive analysis has revealed similar
the nucleation process preferentially interact with the C-terminal findings for heterotypic protein interactions188 (Fig. 5c). In particu-
end208. On the other hand, oligomers formed during the nucleation lar, the findings suggest that sequence similarity plays a crucial role
of monomers are largely non-fibrillar and predominantly dissociate for the cross-reactivity of amyloid fibril tips. Registered stacking of
to replenish the monomeric pool instead of converting to mature identical side chain residues on top of each other along the fibrillar
fibrils209,210. The formation of such off-pathway oligomeric species axis enables sequence-dependent templated binding, resembling
is proposed to compromise the fidelity of aggregation kinetics by the self-interactions formed during fibril elongation188. Importantly,
increasing the variability of lag phases and the amplitude of end-state design strategies employing these properties have been used in several
phases211. Early metastable oligomers inhibit nucleation and growth of studies to develop novel therapeutics that target amyloids through
fibrils by competing for monomers, thus generating biphasic assembly structure-based inhibitor designs154,188,231–234. In these designs, the inhibi-
kinetics that transition to standard sigmoidal growth over a critical tor peptides are constructed based on the APR sequence to enable bind-
monomer concentration that hinders their formation212. Furthermore, ing to the fibril tip. However, these inhibitors also incorporate sequence
these metastable species block secondary nucleation by attaching to variants in one or a few positions that block further fibril growth. Inhibi-
fibril surfaces213. Off-pathway oligomers have been linked to higher tors initially developed to target APRs of Aβ assembly were found to also
levels of disorder that create repulsions or introduce entropic costs inhibit islet amyloid peptide (IAPP) growth due to the sequence similar-
for the formation of ordered fibrils214. ity of their respective APR sequences235. This observation underscores
the sequence specificity of APR cross-interactions but also their ability
Interactions and toxicity of amyloids to tolerate mismatches. Similar rules of specificity seem to support
The mechanisms through which amyloids exert toxicity have been amyloid co-assemblies. Solved structures of heterocomplexes such as
a topic of ongoing debate in the field. Multiple lines of evidence suggest Aβ with Aβ or the necrosome complex (which is a functional amyloid
40 42
that small soluble species are responsible for the observed toxicity. hetero-assembly composed of successive rungs of RIPK1 and RIPK3;
These species have been associated with numerous detrimental effects, see Box 1 and Supplementary Table 1) have validated the necessity for
such as permeabilization of cellular membranes, impairment of degra- sequence and structural compatibility along the fibril axis236,237. It is worth
dation pathways, disruption of synaptic signalling and mitochon- noting that such interactions actively steer amyloid polymorphism by
drial dysfunction215–217. The toxicity induced by fibrillar aggregation altering the morphology of fibrils formed by self-assembly188,208.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 923

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
a Surface interactions
b Integral interactions
Heparin
Secondary nucleation
Fatty
acid
Nucleic acids
Post-translational
Thioflavin T modifications
congo red Lipid membrane
pFTAA
c Tip interactions d Energetic implications
Stabilized by interaction A Stabilized by interaction B
Heterotypic
amyloid interaction
Stabilized by interaction C
Lipid membrane
e Fuzzy coat interactions f Sequestration
Molecular
chaperone Nucleic
acids Molecular
chaperone
Native
Nucleic acids
interactor
Owing to identical side chain stacking, the lateral surfaces of amy- perimeter of amyloid structures (defined by cryo-EM), suggesting the
loid fibrils form regular steric patterns along the axis that are either presence of repetitively bound cofactors239. These densities are often
hydrophobic or polar/ionic in nature, thus enabling repeated binding adjacent to stacks of same-charge side chains, suggesting the bind-
of diverse molecules along the fibril axis (for example with amyloid ing of charge-compensating polyionic cofactors239,240. Lateral surface
reporting dyes84,238) (Fig. 5a). As a consequence of this lateral perio- templating has been associated with co-aggregation events involving
dicity, unidentified electron densities are often found decorating the several different proteins that do not share sequence or structural
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 924
ygrenE
Interacting
protein
Conformation
Interacting protein
Proteasome
Metal ions
Supersaturated
protein
Lipids
Fig. 5 | Amyloid interactions with other biomolecules can have significant steer the morphology of amyloid fibril structures by lowering the energy
implications for aggregation-related mechanisms of toxicity. a, Lateral barriers of specific polymorphs. e, Non-core components of fibrils, such as
surfaces of amyloid fibrils have been proposed to self-catalyse their growth the fuzzy coat, have also been shown to promote the functionality of fibrils
through secondary nucleation, but also to facilitate cross-interactions with by harbouring interactions with other biomolecules53. f, The heterogeneity of
important cofactors such as polyanionic nucleic acids and polysaccharides. The amyloid deposits in patients can be explained by several mechanisms of toxicity.
same surface might also promote interaction with lipid bilayers. b, Heterotypic The interplay of amyloids with the proteostatic machinery, including molecular
interactions with other molecules (such as lipids) or integral sequence properties chaperones, as well as the presence of a metastable sub-proteome that exists
(such as post-translational modifications) can assist with shaping the morphology beyond its solubility limit and is therefore susceptible to widespread proteostatic
of derived aggregates. c, The growing ends of amyloid fibrils are reactive surfaces collapse could explain the heterogeneous composition of in vivo deposits. Natural
that promote heterotypic interactions with other proteins or lipid bilayers. cofactors of fibrils are often co-deposited with amyloids and could lead to both a
d, Heterotypic interactions with other cofactors can facilitate stabilization and loss-of-function phenotype or gain-of-function toxicity events.

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
architecture184,213,232,241. Cofactor binding therefore likely contributes in double-stranded DNA248. Mis-localization of the nuclear histone dem-
to steering amyloid polymorphism in different pathological contexts ethylase LSD1 to cytoplasmic neurofibrillary tangle tau inclusions in
(Fig. 5d). P301S mouse models promotes neuronal cell death in the hippocampus
The dynamic and structurally disordered regions surrounding the and cortex leading to associated learning and memory defects224. Simi-
rigid cores of amyloids are referred to as fuzzy coat regions. As a result larly, APRs can serve as heterotypic anchors, facilitating co-assembly of
of their increased surface accessibility and structural dynamics, these functional proteins and increasing cellular susceptibility to aggregation
sequences are believed to modulate various amyloid activities, such as spreading (leading to loss-of-function toxicity or to a gain-of-function
spreading, liquid–liquid phase transition and cross-interplay with other phenotype)188,208. Several studies have shown that the heterotypic
cellular components53,242 (Fig. 5e); for example, the functional oligo- composition of condensates can synergistically trap proteins towards
merization of Orb2 enhances translation243. Similarly, these regions co-aggregation following their maturation220,249. Notably, however,
can modulate amyloid assembly by mediating chaperone binding244, contradictory theories propose that hetero-interactions can also work
or can lead to loss-of-function events by dragging native interactors as a buffer to control protein aggregation within condensates250.
towards co-aggregation245. Sequestration can also disrupt cellular proteostasis. PolyQ expan-
sions from huntingtin or ataxin 7 sequester the HSJ1 chaperone, lead-
Sequestration of proteins ing to proteostasis imbalance and aggregation of ataxin 3 (ref. 251).
Protein aggregates can sequester cellular components, causing loss of Tau extracts from the brains of PS19 mice impair protein folding
function or mis-localization (Fig. 5f). For example, TDP-43 fragments and clathrin-mediated endocytosis by inactivating HSP70, HSP90 and
form cytoplasmic inclusions that sequester RNA-binding proteins, lead- J-domain chaperones, an effect that can be reversed by exogenous
ing to dysregulation of mRNA maturation246. FUS mis-localization in the addition of a small molecule that replenishes cytosolic chaperone
cytosol alters its RNA regulatory functions and induces DNA damage247. expression223. RNA-induced tau and Aβ aggregates co-deposit ribo-
Dipeptide repeat expansions resulting from C9orf72 hexanucleotide somal 80S, which reduces translation efficiency in yeast cells252. Cryo
repeat expansions, which pathologically assemble in frontotempo- electron tomography showed that intracellular inclusions formed
ral dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (see Supplementary by different aggregation-prone polypeptides recruit and impair the
Table 1), deplete levels of functional pATM and hnRNPA3, causing breaks functionality of proteasome subunits (Fig. 5f), along with TRiC/CCT
Box 4
Synthetic amyloids
Increasingly, synthetic amyloid fibrils are being explored for protofilament contacts, indicating that polymorphism was instead
various applications, ranging from structural scaffolds to improved critical in enabling the functionality of these filaments.
techno-functional properties in food, innovative catalysts385 and the
deliberate knockdown of target proteins by targeted aggregation. Food
Proteins have a techno-functional role in food applications, such as
Materials gelling, foaming and emulsifying. Evidence indicates that the fibrillar
The chemical stability, fibrillar nature and tensile strength of amyloid state of food-born proteins can improve (some of) these properties
fibrils makes them attractive components of novel materials386. and that common food processing techniques promote their
Moreover, amyloid fibrils can be generated from short peptides formation310–315. Given that bioavailability is higher in the amyloid form
whose sequence can be rationally designed. For example, synthetic (in which only the amyloid core is protected from proteases) than for
spider silk was constructed on the basis of amyloid architecture the folded protein, increasing the fibrillar protein content of certain
and showed tensile strength and toughness that surpassed some foods might one day lead to a reduced need for protein, in particular
naturally occurring silks387. of animal-derived protein138,395–397, although the impact on human
health requires further investigation398.
Catalysis
Amyloids initially appeared in catalytic applications by tethering Targeted aggregation
existing enzymes to an amyloid backbone388,389, but increasingly Our group has shown that short aggregation-prone peptides can
the surface of the amyloid itself is being employed directly for be used to induce the aggregation of selected target proteins. This
catalysis, either through the immobilization of metal ions85,226,227, approach is based on the observation that most naturally occurring
prosthetic groups or co-enzymes390–392, or simply by the positioning polypeptides contain aggregation-prone regions (APRs) that tend to
of charged side chains on the amyloid surface393. The concept of be unique within their proteome, and that amyloid assembly displays
surface-induced catalysis suggests that coordinated interaction sequence specificity399. We have shown the potential of this approach
interfaces are essential for this functional process. However, the in combating bacterial strains that are resistant to established
cryo electron microscopy structure of a catalytic amyloid revealed antibiotics70,400,401, in viral infections69 and in an oncological setting68,71.
that these too are susceptible to polymorphy394; specifically, Moreover, derivatives labelled with radionuclides have potential as
metal-binding sites were observed to form at the interface of PET tracers402.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 925

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
and ribosomes, providing visible intracellular evidence of spatial isola- Lipid–oligomer interactions have also been labelled as highly dynamic
tion of proteostatic cellular components by protein aggregates253,254. in several systems. Solution and solid-state NMR have revealed that
Importantly, however, proteasome inactivation has also been proposed two different species of αS oligomers are largely disordered or require
to occur in a non-sequestered fashion. Oligomeric species derived only local folded elements when disrupting membrane integrity275.
from αS, Aβ and Htt-53Q sharing significant structural similarities bind Soluble oligomeric Aβ species formed at different maturation stages
with high affinity and inhibit the functionality of the 20S proteasome induce membrane permeabilization or an inflammatory response
through allosteric impairment255. Cryo electron tomography also as a function of size276. Conversion of dynamic non-amyloid-like oli-
revealed that amyloid-like fibril aggregates can cause gain-of-function gomeric IAPP species has been linked to gain-of-function toxicity by
toxicity resulting in lysosomal defects256 and impair vesicular traf- inducing vesicle perforation277. However, another study showed that
ficking as shown in cases of Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease IAPP-induced vesicle leakage is a biphasic process mainly attributed to
pathology257. secondary nucleation and the gradual elongation of fibrillar seeds in
Sequestration by amyloids can also be polymorph-specific. For the presence of membrane particles of various lipid compositions278.
instance, single-particle analysis showed that a size-dependent popu- Mature amyloid fibrils have been primarily linked to toxicity as
lation of patient-derived aggregates exerts its toxicity by penetrating inducers of mechanical stress that can cause tissue damage, which
cells and binding to proteasome subunits, causing their inactivation258. partially also includes damaged membrane components279. Direct
Differential proteasome inhibition was also observed for two distinct structural evidence confirms the binding of lipids to mature amyloid
αS strains prepared under different in vitro conditions259. fibril aggregates230. Cryo-EM revealed that αS forms distinct fibrils
in the presence of lipids, which in turn were found to decorate their
Membranes and lipids exposed hydrophobic patches, liaise as cross-contacts for their alter-
Lipid–amyloid interactions have long been recognized as a source of native quaternary organization or channel through internal cavities of
toxicity in proteinopathies. For instance, Lewy body formation, involv- the amyloid core280. Correlative light and electron microscopy analysis
ing the incorporation of membranous organelles, has been proposed of Lewy body inclusions from Parkinson disease post-mortem human
as a major contributor to toxicity in Parkinson disease, surpassing brain tissue exposed a crowded presence of lipid components281. Simi-
that of αS fibrillation260. However, the exact impact of lipid interac- lar findings were revealed by cryo electron tomography in deposits
tions on the morphology and toxicity of aggregates is still a subject formed in a cell culture reporter model of systemic AA amyloidosis229.
of debate. The functionality of αS in presynaptic vesicle docking is Impressively, this study also identified that the primary site of inter-
affected by the composition of biological membranes261. In line with action between amyloids and lipid vesicles corresponded to the fibril
this observation, pathological aggregation of αS has been proposed tips rather than their lateral surfaces, suggesting an amyloid-driven
as an after-effect of its dysregulated binding to its natural substrate specificity for lipid interactions229 (Fig. 5c). This finding might explain
PIP3, a process that is initiated by a loss of function of synaptojanin 1, why evidence of lipid interactions is scarce despite the numerous
a phosphoinositide phosphatase and a risk gene for early-onset Parkin- solved ex vivo structures. Stringent purification protocols for aggre-
son disease262. Similarly, apolipoproteins participate in native-like lipid gate extraction might promote this selective bias, although analysis of
interactions in a mechanism evolved to protect against the exposure lateral amyloid surfaces indicates that fibril cavities are typically nar-
of their APRs and their conformational switching from α-helical to row and occupy polar residues, thus hindering lipid binding84. Indeed,
cross-β amyloid-compatible folds263,264. NMR spectroscopy identified efforts tracing aggregate surface hydrophobicity of αS aggregates
that early APR-driven interactions enable the partial insertion of Aβ revealed that oligomeric species expose more hydrophobic patches
into membranes, a process that promotes nucleation and shapes the than their fibril counterparts282. Confirming the above, sub-micellar
morphology of the derived fibrils265. Similar interactions promote lipids were shown to catalyse apolipoprotein C-II aggregation, yet
the segmental assembly of αS on the surface of anionic phospholipids266. no lipids were recovered as cofactors in contact with mature fibrils.
Free lipids are proposed to shield the hydrophobicity of exposed APRs Similarly, cholesterol-containing lipid surfaces seemed to massively
in a chaperone-like manner, but, above a critical concentration, they catalyse primary heterotypic nucleation of Aβ283, whereas aminosterol
can also enable the insertion of oligomeric species into bilayers59. derivatives can facilitate the secondary nucleation of Aβ and reduce
The molecular composition of membranes also determines its toxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans either by competing for surfaces
their differential binding affinity to different amyloid species. For (and thus causing the displacement of oligomers) or by promoting the
example, lipid bilayers generated by lipid oxidation either promote formation of less toxic mature species284.
the nucleation of monomeric Aβ, stabilize non-toxic oligomers that
are still capable of compromising the integrity of bilayers or reform The emerging role of microbiomes
on-pathway protofibrils that exhibit clear toxicity267. Similarly, ApoE4, External factors have also been associated with aggregation disor-
a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer disease, is linked to lipid dysregula- ders although the exact nature of this relationship is yet to be defined.
tion in Alzheimer disease brains; it impairs cholesterol transport caus- Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs; short conserved
ing intracellular lipid deposition268 and myelination dysfunction269. microbial motifs that are absent in the host) from bacterial infec-
However, ApoE4 also accelerates Aβ deposition270 and hinders its tions activate immune responses, triggering microglia activation
clearance271; therefore, its exact role in Alzheimer disease remains and oxidative stress (which are both downstream responses linked
unclear. to neurodegeneration). Accumulation of endotoxin lipopolysaccha-
Lipid–oligomer interactions are in the spotlight for understand- ride (LPS)285 owing to systemic infection is associated with various
ing amyloid toxicity. Cryo-EM determination of oligomers formed aggregation-based pathologies286, inducing neuroinflammation287 and
by Aβ when fused to an α-haemolysin toxin revealed that it forms morphological changes in amyloid fibrils288. Interestingly, the amy-
a lipid-soluble heptameric pore complex272, reminiscent of the for- loidogenic SAA protein suppresses the effects of LPS and ameliorates
mation of similar pores by other amyloid-forming proteins273,274. toxicity in mice289.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 926

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
The gut–brain axis has a role in aggregation diseases, but this topic structures has led to significant advancements in the development
is still in its infancy. Both the composition of the gut microbiome and of engineered therapeutics. Notably, there has been an increase in
dietary changes affect Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease290,291 to structure-based approaches focused on the creation of highly potent
the level that dietary restructuring is considered a therapeutic strategy and specific anti-amyloid biomimetics296,329,330. These designs aim
against disease progression292,293. The composition of the gut micro- to target the attachment to growing fibril ends and thus block axial
biome has also been linked to levels of disease biomarkers such as propagation, effectively combatting the assembly of various proteins
ApoE294. Microbiome-generated functional amyloids can interact with such as tau188,231, αS232, Aβ233, IAPP154 and transthyretin (TTR)234. Hetero-
brain amyloids, influencing aggregation and causing behavioural and typic recognition has also been employed to raise antibodies331,332 and
motor impairments295–297. Bacterial amyloid chaperones can inhibit to engineer custom protein designs232 that slow down the formation
pathological amyloids298, whereas amyloids themselves can exhibit and toxicity of aggregates. Similarly, our improved understanding
antimicrobial activity299,300. For instance, Aβ can form toxic oligomeric of the factors dictating amyloid formation and stability is now being
pores with bactericidal effects301; sequence similarity between Aβ harnessed to develop synthetic functional biomaterials with diverse
and bacteriocins might have evolved as a strategy to tune an immune applications, including catalysis, supporting scaffolds and bioproducts
response against the latter301. in the food industry (Box 4).
The interplay between the intestinal environment and amyloids These encouraging results, along with breakthroughs in protein
has also been exposed. For instance, intestinal defensins with antimi- structure prediction from artificial intelligence-based approaches
crobial activity cross-interact and prevent further propagation and cell (Box 3) and direct structural determination of amyloids from patient
cytotoxicity of Aβ, IAPP and calcitonin302. Microbiota-excreted fatty tissues, are galvanizing the field and laying the groundwork for future
acids enhance Aβ plaque formation in mouse models of Alzheimer breakthroughs. Despite this progress, our understanding of protein
disease303. In light of the ability of other metabolites to template amy- aggregation is still in its infancy. Critical features, such as the spatiotem-
loid formation304,305, this concept raises further questions regarding the poral dynamics of early amyloid formation, the diversity of oligomers,
role of diet and food in amyloid pathologies306,307. Indeed, food proteins the involvement of on and off-pathway species, and the true origins
have been shown to form amyloid fibrils in isolation (Box 4), as well as of toxicity in disease, remain subjects of debate. It is increasingly evi-
to cross-seed, resulting in inhibition308 or exacerbated pathological dent that multiple overlapping processes and pathways contribute to
amyloid formation309. These findings raise concerns in terms of the protein aggregation. However, we are now reaching a point at which we
safety and impact on health of common food processing approaches can deduce the structure–function relationship of these species more
that rely on aggregate formation, such as gelation or foaming310–315. accurately. These insights provide hope that the fundamental research
Finally, the relationship of amyloids to viruses is also gaining discussed in this Review will ultimately benefit patients worldwide,
traction. For example, the HSV-1 viral corona promotes aggregation improving their quality of life.
of Aβ both in vitro and in animals316. Similar cross-interactions have
been validated between SARS-CoV-2 (and other viral infectious agents) Published online: 8 September 2023
and amyloid proteins317. The SARS-Cov-2 nucleocapsid protein utilizes
References
electrostatic interactions to accelerate αS fibrillation and induce cell
1. Hipp, M. S., Kasturi, P. & Hartl, F. U. The proteostasis network and its decline in ageing.
death318. In fact, parallel studies have shown that SARS-Cov-2 proteins Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 421–435 (2019).
can also form amyloids in isolation319,320, with similar results deriving 2. Stroo, E., Koopman, M., Nollen, E. A. A. & Mata-Cabana, A. Cellular regulation of
amyloid formation in aging and disease. Front. Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.3389/
for other viral species, such as the Nipah and Hendra viruses321. Viral
fnins.2017.00064 (2017).
infectivity has also been indirectly associated with neuroinflamma- 3. Hartl, F. U. Protein misfolding diseases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 86, 21–26 (2017).
tion, protein quality control dysfunction and spreading of misfolded 4. Chiti, F. & Dobson, C. M. Protein misfolding, amyloid formation, and human disease:
a summary of progress over the last decade. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 86, 27–68 (2017).
products322,323; protein aggregation has been proposed as a strategy
5. Buxbaum, J. N. et al. Amyloid nomenclature 2022: update, novel proteins, and
for the development of novel types of antiviral agents69. recommendations by the International Society of Amyloidosis (ISA) Nomenclature
Committee. Amyloid 29, 213–219 (2022).
Conclusions and perspectives 6. Wechalekar, A. D., Gillmore, J. D. & Hawkins, P. N. Systemic amyloidosis. Lancet 387,
2641–2654 (2016).
Progress in treating protein misfolding diseases is evident from US 7. Jucker, M. & Walker, L. C. Propagation and spread of pathogenic protein assemblies in
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1341–1349 (2018).
8. Peng, C., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. Protein transmission in neurodegenerative
(EMA) approval of therapies such as tafamidis for patients with familial disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16, 199–212 (2020).
amyloid polyneuropathy324, or migalastat, which rescues the folding 9. Scheckel, C. & Aguzzi, A. Prions, prionoids and protein misfolding disorders. Nat. Rev.
of α-galactosidase in Fabry disease. Voxelotor has shown promise as Genet. 19, 405–418 (2018).
10. Otzen, D. & Riek, R. Functional amyloids. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. https://
a conformational corrector of haemoglobin in sickle cell disease325, doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a033860 (2019).
similar to several approved correctors of the folding of the CFTR con- 11. Cereghetti, G. et al. Reversible amyloids of pyruvate kinase couple cell metabolism and
ductance channel (ivacaftor, tezacaftor and elexacaftor). Even in the stress granule disassembly. Nat. Cell Biol. 23, 1085–1094 (2021).
12. Jeon, J., Yau, W.-M. & Tycko, R. Early events in amyloid-β self-assembly probed by
challenging field of neurodegenerative diseases, clinical trials with time-resolved solid state NMR and light scattering. Nat. Commun. 14, 2964
lecanemab in Alzheimer disease have shown promising progress. Spe- (2023).
13. Zimmermann, M. R. et al. Mechanism of secondary nucleation at the single fibril level
cifically, selected patients with early mild cognitive impairment, even
at later stages of the disease, experienced a moderate slowdown in the ( f 2 ro 0 m 21 d ). irect observations of Aβ 42 aggregation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 16621–16629
decline of cognition and function326. This breakthrough comes after 14. Wesseling, H. et al. Tau PTM profiles identify patient heterogeneity and stages of
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 183, 1699–1713.e13 (2020).
years of uncertainty regarding the role of aggregates in Alzheimer dis-
15. Tracy, T. E. et al. Tau interactome maps synaptic and mitochondrial processes associated
ease, compounded by unsuccessful clinical trials, controversial studies with neurodegeneration. Cell https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.041 (2022).
and a lack of effective treatments327,328. Our deepened understanding 16. Ferrari, L. et al. Arginine π-stacking drives binding to fibrils of the Alzheimer protein Tau.
Nat. Commun. 11, 571 (2020).
of the structural characteristics, kinetics and interactions of amyloid
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 927

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
17. Gallardo, R., Ranson, N. A. & Radford, S. E. Amyloid structures: much more than just a 53. Ulamec, S. M., Brockwell, D. J. & Radford, S. E. Looking beyond the core: the role of
cross-β fold. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 60, 7–16 (2020). flanking regions in the aggregation of amyloidogenic peptides and proteins. Front.
18. Sawaya, M. R., Hughes, M. P., Rodriguez, J. A., Riek, R. & Eisenberg, D. S. The expanding Neurosci. 14, 611285 (2020).
amyloid family: structure, stability, function, and pathogenesis. Cell 184, 4857–4873 54. Strodel, B. Energy landscapes of protein aggregation and conformation switching in
(2021). intrinsically disordered proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 433, 167182 (2021).
19. Louros, N., van der Kant, R., Schymkowitz, J. & Rousseau, F. StAmP-DB: a platform for 55. Mirbaha, H. et al. Inert and seed-competent tau monomers suggest structural origins of
structures of polymorphic amyloid fibril cores. Bioinformatics 38, 2636–2638 (2022). aggregation. eLife 7, e36584 (2018).
20. van der Kant, R., Louros, N., Schymkowitz, J. & Rousseau, F. Thermodynamic analysis 56. Furukawa, K. et al. Isoelectric point-amyloid formation of α-synuclein extends the
of amyloid fibril structures reveals a common framework for stability in amyloid generality of the solubility and supersaturation-limited mechanism. Curr. Res. Struct.
polymorphs. Structure https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2022.05.002 (2022). Biol. 2, 35–44 (2020).
21. Mullapudi, V. et al. Network of hotspot interactions cluster tau amyloid folds. Nat. 57. Kandola, T. et al. The polyglutamine amyloid nucleus in living cells is a monomer
Commun. 14, 895 (2023). with competing dimensions of order. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/
22. Karplus, M. & Weaver, D. L. Protein-folding dynamics. Nature 260, 404–406 (1976). 2021.08.29.458132 (2021).
23. Levinthal, C. Are there pathways for protein folding ? J. Chim. Phys. 65, 44–45 (1968). 58. Killinger, B. A., Melki, R., Brundin, P. & Kordower, J. H. Endogenous α-synuclein
24. Ellis, R. J. Protein folding: importance of the Anfinsen cage. Curr. Biol. 13, R881–883 (2003). monomers, oligomers and resulting pathology: let’s talk about the lipids in the room.
25. Anfinsen, C. B. Principles that govern the folding of protein chains. Science 181, 223–230 NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 5, 23 (2019).
(1973). 59. Sciacca, M. F. et al. Lipid-chaperone hypothesis: a common molecular mechanism of
26. Fersht, A. R. & Daggett, V. Protein folding and unfolding at atomic resolution. Cell 108, membrane disruption by intrinsically disordered proteins. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 11,
573–582 (2002). 4336–4350 (2020).
27. Kiefhaber, T. Kinetic traps in lysozyme folding. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 9029–9033 60. Riback, J. A. et al. Innovative scattering analysis shows that hydrophobic disordered
(1995). proteins are expanded in water. Science 358, 238–241 (2017).
28. Silow, M. & Oliveberg, M. Transient aggregates in protein folding are easily mistaken for 61. Borgia, A. et al. Transient misfolding dominates multidomain protein folding. Nat.
folding intermediates. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 6084–6086 (1997). Commun. 6, 8861 (2015).
29. Buchner, J. Molecular chaperones and protein quality control: an introduction to the JBC 62. Borgia, M. B. et al. Single-molecule fluorescence reveals sequence-specific misfolding in
Reviews thematic series. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 2074–2075 (2019). multidomain proteins. Nature 474, 662–665 (2011).
30. Powers, E. T., Morimoto, R. I., Dillin, A., Kelly, J. W. & Balch, W. E. Biological and chemical 63. Zheng, W., Schafer, N. P. & Wolynes, P. G. Frustration in the energy landscapes of
approaches to diseases of proteostasis deficiency. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 78, 959–991 multidomain protein misfolding. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 1680–1685 (2013).
(2009). 64. Guthertz, N. et al. The effect of mutation on an aggregation-prone protein: an in vivo,
31. Baldwin, A. J. et al. Metastability of native proteins and the phenomenon of amyloid in vitro, and in silico analysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2200468119 (2022).
formation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 14160–14163 (2011). 65. Ventura, S. et al. Short amino acid stretches can mediate amyloid formation in globular
32. Chiti, F. et al. Kinetic partitioning of protein folding and aggregation. Nat. Struct. Biol. 9, proteins: the Src homology 3 (SH3) case. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 7258–7263
137–143 (2002). (2004).
33. Huang, C. et al. Intrinsically aggregation-prone proteins form amyloid-like aggregates 66. Ivanova, M. I., Sawaya, M. R., Gingery, M., Attinger, A. & Eisenberg, D. An amyloid-forming
and contribute to tissue aging in Caenorhabditis elegans. eLife https://doi.org/10.7554/ segment of β 2-microglobulin suggests a molecular model for the fibril. Proc. Natl Acad.
eLife.43059 (2019). Sci. USA 101, 10584–10589 (2004).
34. Vecchi, G. et al. Proteome-wide observation of the phenomenon of life on the edge of 67. Ventura, S., Lacroix, E. & Serrano, L. Insights into the origin of the tendency of the
solubility. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 1015–1020 (2020). PI3–SH3 domain to form amyloid fibrils. J. Mol. Biol. 322, 1147–1158 (2002).
35. Ciryam, P., Kundra, R., Morimoto, R. I., Dobson, C. M. & Vendruscolo, M. Supersaturation 68. Janssen, K. et al. Exploiting the intrinsic misfolding propensity of the KRAS oncoprotein.
is a major driving force for protein aggregation in neurodegenerative diseases. Trends Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 120, e2214921120 (2023).
Pharmacol. Sci. 36, 72–77 (2015). 69. Michiels, E. et al. Reverse engineering synthetic antiviral amyloids. Nat. Commun. 11,
36. Ciryam, P. et al. A metastable subproteome underlies inclusion formation in muscle 2832 (2020).
proteinopathies. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-019-0853-9 70. Khodaparast, L. et al. Aggregating sequences that occur in many proteins constitute
(2019). weak spots of bacterial proteostasis. Nat. Commun. 9, 866 (2018).
37. Niwa, T., Kanamori, T., Ueda, T. & Taguchi, H. Global analysis of chaperone effects using 71. Gallardo, R. et al. De novo design of a biologically active amyloid. Science https://doi.org/
a reconstituted cell-free translation system. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 8937–8942 10.1126/science.aah4949 (2016).
(2012). 72. De Baets, G., Van Doorn, L., Rousseau, F. & Schymkowitz, J. Increased aggregation is
38. Fujiwara, K., Ishihama, Y., Nakahigashi, K., Soga, T. & Taguchi, H. A systematic survey of in more frequently associated to human disease-associated mutations than to neutral
vivo obligate chaperonin-dependent substrates. EMBO J. 29, 1552–1564 (2010). polymorphisms. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004374 (2015).
39. Niwa, T., Fujiwara, K. & Taguchi, H. Identification of novel in vivo obligate GroEL/ES 73. Thangakani, A. M., Kumar, S., Velmurugan, D. & Gromiha, M. S. M. How do thermophilic
substrates based on data from a cell-free proteomics approach. FEBS Lett. 590, 251–257 proteins resist aggregation. Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinforma. 80, 1003–1015 (2012).
(2016). 74. Langenberg, T. et al. Thermodynamic and evolutionary coupling between the native and
40. Gestaut, D. et al. Structural visualization of the tubulin folding pathway directed by amyloid state of globular proteins. Cell Rep. 31, 107512 (2020).
human chaperonin TRiC/CCT. Cell 185, 4770–4787.e20 (2022). 75. Geller, R., Pechmann, S., Acevedo, A., Andino, R. & Frydman, J. Hsp90 shapes protein
41. Chen, D. H. et al. Visualizing GroEL/ES in the act of encapsulating a folding protein. Cell and RNA evolution to balance trade-offs between protein stability and aggregation.
153, 1354–1365 (2013). Nat. Commun. 9, 1781 (2018).
42. Sharma, S. et al. Monitoring protein conformation along the pathway of 76. Claes, F. et al. Exposure of a cryptic Hsp70 binding site determines the cytotoxicity of the
chaperonin-assisted folding. Cell 133, 142–153 (2008). ALS-associated SOD1-mutant A4V. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 32, 443–457 (2019).
43. Ellis, R. J. Revisiting the Anfinsen cage. Fold. Des. 1, R9–R15 (1996). 77. Gilis, D., Massar, S., Cerf, N. J. & Rooman, M. Optimality of the genetic code
44. Balch, W. E., Morimoto, R. I., Dillin, A. & Kelly, J. W. Adapting proteostasis for disease with respect to protein stability and amino-acid frequencies. Genome Biol. 2,
intervention. Science 319, 916–919 (2008). RESEARCH0049 (2001).
45. Sawaya, M. R. et al. Atomic structures of amyloid cross-β spines reveal varied steric 78. Buck, P. M., Kumar, S. & Singh, S. K. On the role of aggregation prone regions in protein
zippers. Nature 447, 453–457 (2007). evolution, stability, and enzymatic catalysis: insights from diverse analyses. PLoS
46. Teng, P. K. & Eisenberg, D. Short protein segments can drive a non-fibrillizing protein into Comput. Biol. 9, e1003291 (2013).
the amyloid state. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 22, 531–536 (2009). 79. Maury, C. P. Self-propagating β-sheet polypeptide structures as prebiotic informational
47. Louros, N. et al. WALTZ-DB 2.0: an updated database containing structural information molecular entities: the amyloid world. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 39, 141–150 (2009).
of experimentally determined amyloid-forming peptides. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, 80. Carny, O. & Gazit, E. A model for the role of short self-assembled peptides in the very
D389–D393 (2020). early stages of the origin of life. FASEB J. 19, 1051–1055 (2005).
48. Santos, J., Pallares, I., Iglesias, V. & Ventura, S. Cryptic amyloidogenic regions in 81. Rout, S. K., Rhyner, D., Riek, R. & Greenwald, J. Prebiotically plausible autocatalytic
intrinsically disordered proteins: function and disease association. Comput. Struct. peptide amyloids. Chemistry 28, e202103841 (2022).
Biotechnol. J. 19, 4192–4206 (2021). 82. Serio, T. R. et al. Nucleated conformational conversion and the replication of
49. Fuxreiter, M. Fold or not to fold upon binding—does it really matter? Curr. Opin. Struct. conformational information by a prion determinant. Science 289, 1317–1321 (2000).
Biol. 54, 19–25 (2019). 83. Carny, O. & Gazit, E. Creating prebiotic sanctuary: self-assembling supramolecular
50. Oldfield, C. J. & Dunker, A. K. Intrinsically disordered proteins and intrinsically disordered peptide structures bind and stabilize RNA. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 41, 121–132 (2011).
protein regions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 83, 553–584 (2014). 84. Sanderson, J. M. The association of lipids with amyloid fibrils. J. Biol. Chem. 298, 102108
51. Maurer-Stroh, S. et al. Exploring the sequence determinants of amyloid structure using (2022).
position-specific scoring matrices. Nat. Methods 7, 237–242 (2010). 85. Rufo, C. M. et al. Short peptides self-assemble to produce catalytic amyloids. Nat. Chem.
52. Louros, N., Orlando, G., De Vleeschouwer, M., Rousseau, F. & Schymkowitz, J. 6, 303–309 (2014).
Structure-based machine-guided mapping of amyloid sequence space reveals 86. Sun-Wang, J. L., Ivanova, S. & Zorzano, A. The dialogue between the ubiquitin-proteasome
uncharted sequence clusters with higher solubilities. Nat. Commun. 11, 3314 (2020). system and autophagy: implications in ageing. Ageing Res. Rev. 64, 101203 (2020).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 928

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
87. Balchin, D., Hayer-Hartl, M. & Hartl, F. U. Recent advances in understanding catalysis of 122. van Ham, T. J. et al. Identification of MOAG-4/SERF as a regulator of age-related
protein folding by molecular chaperones. FEBS Lett. 594, 2770–2781 (2020). proteotoxicity. Cell 142, 601–612 (2010).
88. Mashaghi, A. et al. Alternative modes of client binding enable functional plasticity of 123. Pras, A. et al. The cellular modifier MOAG-4/SERF drives amyloid formation through
Hsp70. Nature 539, 448–451 (2016). charge complementation. EMBO J. 40, e107568 (2021).
89. Faust, O. et al. HSP40 proteins use class-specific regulation to drive HSP70 functional 124. Hong, J.-Y. et al. Structural and dynamic studies reveal that the Ala-rich region of ataxin-7
diversity. Nature 587, 489–494 (2020). initiates α-helix formation of the polyQ tract but suppresses its aggregation. Sci. Rep. 9,
90. Burmann, B. M. et al. Regulation of α-synuclein by chaperones in mammalian cells. 7481 (2019).
Nature 577, 127–132 (2020). 125. Chen, D. et al. Tau local structure shields an amyloid-forming motif and controls
91. Goloubinoff, P., Sassi, A. S., Fauvet, B., Barducci, A. & De Los Rios, P. Chaperones convert aggregation propensity. Nat. Commun. 10, 2493 (2019).
the energy from ATP into the nonequilibrium stabilization of native proteins. Nat. Chem. 126. Zhang, W. et al. Modulation of the aggregation of an amyloidogenic sequence by
Biol. 14, 388–395 (2018). flanking-disordered region in the intrinsically disordered antigen merozoite surface
92. Kaushik, S. & Cuervo, A. M. The coming of age of chaperone-mediated autophagy. protein 2. Eur. Biophys. J. 48, 99–110 (2019).
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 365–381 (2018). 127. Santner, A. A. et al. Sweeping away protein aggregation with entropic bristles:
93. Xu, C. Y. et al. DJ-1 Inhibits α-synuclein aggregation by regulating chaperone-mediated intrinsically disordered protein fusions enhance soluble expression. Biochemistry 51,
autophagy. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9, 308 (2017). 7250–7262 (2012).
94. Bourdenx, M. et al. Chaperone-mediated autophagy prevents collapse of the neuronal 128. Graña-Montes, R., Marinelli, P., Reverter, D. & Ventura, S. N-terminal protein tails act
metastable proteome. Cell 184, 2696–2714.e25 (2021). as aggregation protective entropic bristles: the SUMO case. Biomacromolecules 15,
95. Caballero, B. et al. Acetylated tau inhibits chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes 1194–1203 (2014).
tau pathology propagation in mice. Nat. Commun. 12, 2238 (2021). 129. Michiels, E. et al. Entropic bristles tune the seeding efficiency of prion-nucleating
96. Baughman, H. E. R., Clouser, A. F., Klevit, R. E. & Nath, A. HspB1 and Hsc70 chaperones fragments. Cell Rep. 30, 2834–2845.e3 (2020).
engage distinct tau species and have different inhibitory effects on amyloid formation. 130. Housmans, J. A. J. et al. Investigating the sequence determinants of the curling of
J. Biol. Chem. 293, 2687–2700 (2018). amyloid fibrils using ovalbumin as a case study. Biomacromolecules 23, 3779–3797
97. Kundel, F. et al. Hsp70 inhibits the nucleation and elongation of tau and sequesters tau (2022).
aggregates with high affinity. ACS Chem. Biol. 13, 636–646 (2018). 131. Shi, Y. et al. Structure-based classification of tauopathies. Nature 598, 359–363 (2021).
98. Avellaneda, M. J. et al. Processive extrusion of polypeptide loops by a Hsp100 132. Iadanza, M. G., Jackson, M. P., Hewitt, E. W., Ranson, N. A. & Radford, S. E. A new era
disaggregase. Nature 578, 317–320 (2020). for understanding amyloid structures and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 755–773
99. Nachman, E. et al. Disassembly of Tau fibrils by the human Hsp70 disaggregation machinery (2018).
generates small seeding-competent species. J. Biol. Chem. 295, 9676–9690 (2020). 133. Dueholm, M. S. et al. Fibrillation of the major curli subunit CsgA under a wide range
100. Wentink, A. S. et al. Molecular dissection of amyloid disaggregation by human HSP70. of conditions implies a robust design of aggregation. Biochemistry 50, 8281–8290
Nature 587, 483–488 (2020). (2011).
101. Stein, K. C. & Frydman, J. The stop-and-go traffic regulating protein biogenesis: how 134. Bemporad, F., De Simone, A., Chiti, F. & Dobson, C. M. Characterizing intermolecular
translation kinetics controls proteostasis. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 2076–2084 (2019). interactions that initiate native-like protein aggregation. Biophys. J. 102, 2595–2604
102. Hanson, G. & Coller, J. Codon optimality, bias and usage in translation and mRNA decay. (2012).
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 20–30 (2018). 135. Lafita, A., Tian, P., Best, R. B. & Bateman, A. Tandem domain swapping: determinants of
103. Yan, X. W., Hoek, T. A., Vale, R. D. & Tanenbaum, M. E. Dynamics of translation of single multidomain protein misfolding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 58, 97–104 (2019).
mRNA molecules in vivo. Cell 165, 976–989 (2016). 136. Salinas, N. et al. The amphibian antimicrobial peptide uperin 3.5 is a cross-α/cross-β
104. Jacobs, W. M. & Shakhnovich, E. I. Evidence of evolutionary selection for cotranslational chameleon functional amyloid. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2014442118 (2021).
folding. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 11434–11439 (2017). 137. Bowden, G. A., Paredes, A. M. & Georgiou, G. Structure and morphology of protein
105. Bitran, A., Jacobs, W. M., Zhai, X. & Shakhnovich, E. Cotranslational folding allows inclusion bodies in Escherichia coli. Biotechnology 9, 725–730 (1991).
misfolding-prone proteins to circumvent deep kinetic traps. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 138. Herneke, A. et al. Protein nanofibrils for sustainable food—characterization and
117, 1485–1495 (2020). comparison of fibrils from a broad range of plant protein isolates. ACS Food Sci. Technol.
106. Zhou, T., Weems, M. & Wilke, C. O. Translationally optimal codons associate with 1, 854–864 (2021).
structurally sensitive sites in proteins. Mol. Biol. Evol. 26, 1571–1580 (2009). 139. Sunde, M. et al. Common core structure of amyloid fibrils by synchrotron X-ray
107. Rosenberg, A. A., Marx, A. & Bronstein, A. M. Codon-specific Ramachandran plots diffraction. J. Mol. Biol. 273, 729–739 (1997).
show amino acid backbone conformation depends on identity of the translated codon. 140. Petkova, A. T. et al. A structural model for Alzheimer’s β-amyloid fibrils based on
Nat. Commun. 13, 2815 (2022). experimental constraints from solid state NMR. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 16742–16747
108. Doring, K. et al. Profiling Ssb-nascent chain interactions reveals principles of (2002).
Hsp70-assisted folding. Cell 170, 298 (2017). 141. Wasmer, C. et al. Amyloid fibrils of the HET-s(218–289) prion form a β solenoid with a
109. Shen, X., Song, S., Li, C. & Zhang, J. Synonymous mutations in representative yeast genes triangular hydrophobic core. Science 319, 1523–1526 (2008).
are mostly strongly non-neutral. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04823-w 142. Scheres, S. H., Zhang, W., Falcon, B. & Goedert, M. Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments.
(2022). Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 64, 17–25 (2020).
110. Stein, K. C., Morales-Polanco, F., van der Lienden, J., Rainbolt, T. K. & Frydman, J. Ageing 143. Geddes, A. J., Parker, K. D., Atkins, E. D. & Beighton, E. “Cross-β” conformation in proteins.
exacerbates ribosome pausing to disrupt cotranslational proteostasis. Nature 601, J. Mol. Biol. 32, 343–358 (1968).
637–642 (2022). 144. Yang, Y. et al. Cryo-EM structures of amyloid-β 42 filaments from human brains. Science
111. Wruck, F. et al. The ribosome modulates folding inside the ribosomal exit tunnel. 375, 167–172 (2022).
Commun. Biol. 4, 523 (2021). 145. Fitzpatrick, A. W. P. et al. Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer’s disease.
112. Shen, K. et al. Dual role of ribosome-binding domain of NAC as a potent suppressor of Nature 547, 185–190 (2017).
protein aggregation and aging-related proteinopathies. Mol. Cell 74, 729–741.e7 146. Zhang, W. et al. Novel tau filament fold in corticobasal degeneration. Nature 580,
(2019). 283–287 (2020).
113. Rousseau, F., Serrano, L. & Schymkowitz, J. W. How evolutionary pressure against protein 147. Falcon, B. et al. Tau filaments from multiple cases of sporadic and inherited Alzheimer’s
aggregation shaped chaperone specificity. J. Mol. Biol. 355, 1037–1047 (2006). disease adopt a common fold. Acta Neuropathol. 136, 699–708 (2018).
114. Monsellier, E. & Chiti, F. Prevention of amyloid-like aggregation as a driving force of 148. Schweighauser, M. et al. Structures of α-synuclein filaments from multiple system
protein evolution. EMBO Rep. 8, 737–742 (2007). atrophy. Nature 585, 464–469 (2020).
115. Houben, B. et al. Autonomous aggregation suppression by acidic residues explains why 149. Yang, Y. et al. Structures of α-synuclein filaments from human brains with Lewy
chaperones favour basic residues. EMBO J. https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.2019102864 pathology. Nature 610, 791–795 (2022).
(2020). 150. Zhao, K. et al. Parkinson’s disease-related phosphorylation at Tyr39 rearranges
116. Ganesan, A. et al. Structural hot spots for the solubility of globular proteins. Nat. α-synuclein amyloid fibril structure revealed by cryo-EM. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,
Commun. 7, 10816 (2016). 20305–20315 (2020).
117. De Baets, G., Van Durme, J., Rousseau, F. & Schymkowitz, J. A genome-wide sequence- 151. Guerrero-Ferreira, R., Kovacik, L., Ni, D. & Stahlberg, H. New insights on the structure
structure analysis suggests aggregation gatekeepers constitute an evolutionary of α-synuclein fibrils using cryo-electron microscopy. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 61, 89–95
constrained functional class. J. Mol. Biol. 426, 2405–2412 (2014). (2020).
118. Casari, G., Sander, C. & Valencia, A. A method to predict functional residues in proteins. 152. Cao, Q., Boyer, D. R., Sawaya, M. R., Ge, P. & Eisenberg, D. S. Cryo-EM structures of four
Nat. Struct. Biol. 2, 171–178 (1995). polymorphic TDP-43 amyloid cores. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 619–627 (2019).
119. Huang, L. et al. DAXX represents a new type of protein-folding enabler. Nature https:// 153. Li, Q., Jaroniec, C. P. & Surewicz, W. K. Cryo-EM structure of disease-related prion fibrils
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03824-5 (2021). provides insights into seeding barriers. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 29, 962–965 (2022).
120. Doherty, C. P. A. et al. A short motif in the N-terminal region of α-synuclein is critical for 154. Cao, Q., Boyer, D. R., Sawaya, M. R., Ge, P. & Eisenberg, D. S. Cryo-EM structure and
both aggregation and function. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 249 (2020). inhibitor design of human IAPP (amylin) fibrils. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 653–659 (2020).
121. Yoshimura, Y. et al. MOAG-4 promotes the aggregation of α-synuclein by competing with 155. Gallardo, R. et al. Fibril structures of diabetes-related amylin variants reveal a basis for
self-protective electrostatic interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 8269–8278 (2017). surface-templated assembly. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 1048–1056 (2020).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 929

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
156. Schmidt, M. et al. Cryo-EM structure of a transthyretin-derived amyloid fibril from a 192. Brännström, K. et al. The properties of amyloid-β fibrils are determined by their path of
patient with hereditary ATTR amyloidosis. Nat. Commun. 10, 5008 (2019). formation. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 1940–1949 (2018).
157. Liberta, F. et al. Cryo-EM fibril structures from systemic AA amyloidosis reveal the species 193. Sakalauskas, A., Ziaunys, M. & Smirnovas, V. Concentration-dependent polymorphism of
complementarity of pathological amyloids. Nat. Commun. 10, 1104 (2019). insulin amyloid fibrils. PeerJ 7, e8208 (2019).
158. Radamaker, L. et al. Cryo-EM structure of a light chain-derived amyloid fibril from a 194. Wördehoff, M. M. et al. Single fibril growth kinetics of α-synuclein. J. Mol. Biol. 427,
patient with systemic AL amyloidosis. Nat. Commun. 10, 1103 (2019). 1428–1435 (2015).
159. Kaufman, S. K. et al. Tau prion strains dictate patterns of cell pathology, progression rate, 195. Sleutel, M. et al. Nucleation and growth of a bacterial functional amyloid at single-fiber
and regional vulnerability in vivo. Neuron 92, 796–812 (2016). resolution. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 902–908 (2017).
160. Vaquer-Alicea, J., Diamond, M. I. & Joachimiak, L. A. Tau strains shape disease. Acta 196. Sun, Y. et al. Direct observation of competing prion protein fibril populations with distinct
Neuropathol. 142, 57–71 (2021). structures and kinetics. ACS Nano https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c12009 (2023).
161. Van der Perren, A. et al. The structural differences between patient-derived α-synuclein 197. Pinotsi, D. et al. Direct observation of heterogeneous amyloid fibril growth kinetics via
strains dictate characteristics of Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy and two-color super-resolution microscopy. Nano Lett. 14, 339–345 (2014).
dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol. 139, 977–1000 (2020). 198. Rodriguez, R. A., Chen, L. Y., Plascencia-Villa, G. & Perry, G. Thermodynamics of
162. Soto, C. & Pritzkow, S. Protein misfolding, aggregation, and conformational strains in amyloid-β fibril elongation: atomistic details of the transition state. ACS Chem. Neurosci.
neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1332–1340 (2018). 9, 783–789 (2018).
163. Maxwell, A. M. et al. Emergence of distinct and heterogeneous strains of amyloid βbeta 199. Sasmal, S., Schwierz, N. & Head-Gordon, T. Mechanism of nucleation and growth of Aβ
40
with advanced Alzheimer’s disease pathology in Down syndrome. Acta Neuropathol. fibrils from all-atom and coarse-grained simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 120, 12088–12097
Commun. 9, 201 (2021). (2016).
164. Abskharon, R. et al. Cryo-EM structure of RNA-induced tau fibrils reveals a small 200. Xu, Y. et al. Frustrated peptide chains at the fibril tip control the kinetics of growth of
C-terminal core that may nucleate fibril formation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, amyloid-β fibrils. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2110995118 (2021).
e2119952119 (2022). 201. Xu, Y. et al. Steady, symmetric, and reversible growth and dissolution of individual
165. Zhang, W. et al. Heparin-induced tau filaments are polymorphic and differ from those amyloid-β fibrils. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 10, 2967–2976 (2019).
in Alzheimer’s and Pick’s diseases. eLife 8, e43584 (2019). 202. Nicoud, L., Lazzari, S., Balderas Barragán, D. & Morbidelli, M. Fragmentation of amyloid
166. Tao, Y. et al. Heparin induces α-synuclein to form new fibril polymorphs with attenuated fibrils occurs in preferential positions depending on the environmental conditions.
neuropathology. Nat. Commun. 13, 4226 (2022). J. Phys. Chem. B 119, 4644–4652 (2015).
167. Herrmann, U. S. et al. Structure-based drug design identifies polythiophenes as antiprion 203. Sanami, S., Purton, T. J., Smith, D. P., Tuite, M. F. & Xue, W. F. Comparative analysis
compounds. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 299ra123 (2015). of the relative fragmentation stabilities of polymorphic α-synuclein amyloid fibrils.
168. Heerde, T. et al. Cryo-EM demonstrates the in vitro proliferation of an ex vivo amyloid Biomolecules https://doi.org/10.3390/biom12050630 (2022).
fibril morphology by seeding. Nat. Commun. 13, 85 (2022). 204. Beal, D. M. et al. The division of amyloid fibrils: systematic comparison of fibril
169. Strohäker, T. et al. Structural heterogeneity of α-synuclein fibrils amplified from patient fragmentation stability by linking theory with experiments. iScience 23, 101512
brain extracts. Nat. Commun. 10, 5535 (2019). (2020).
170. Lövestam, S. et al. Seeded assembly in vitro does not replicate the structures of 205. Xue, W.-F., Hellewell, A. L., Hewitt, E. W. & Radford, S. E. Fibril fragmentation in amyloid
α-synuclein filaments from multiple system atrophy. FEBS Open Bio 11, 999–1013 (2021). assembly and cytotoxicity. Prion 4, 20–25 (2010).
171. Lövestam, S. et al. Assembly of recombinant tau into filaments identical to those of 206. Zhang, X. et al. Correlation between cellular uptake and cytotoxicity of fragmented
Alzheimer’s disease and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. eLife 11, e76494 (2022). α-synuclein amyloid fibrils suggests intracellular basis for toxicity. ACS Chem. Neurosci.
172. Al-Hilaly, Y. K. et al. Tau (297–391) forms filaments that structurally mimic the core of 11, 233–241 (2020).
paired helical filaments in Alzheimer’s disease brain. FEBS Lett. 594, 944–950 (2020). 207. Morris, R. J. et al. Mechanistic and environmental control of the prevalence and lifetime
173. Radamaker, L. et al. Cryo-EM reveals structural breaks in a patient-derived amyloid fibril of amyloid oligomers. Nat. Commun. 4, 1891 (2013).
from systemic AL amyloidosis. Nat. Commun. 12, 875 (2021). 208. Konstantoulea, K. et al. Heterotypic amyloid β interactions facilitate amyloid assembly
174. Arakhamia, T. et al. Posttranslational modifications mediate the structural diversity of and modify amyloid structure. EMBO J. 41, e108591 (2022).
tauopathy strains. Cell 180, 633–644.e12 (2020). 209. Dear, A. J. et al. Kinetic diversity of amyloid oligomers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,
175. Louros, N. N. et al. Tracking the amyloidogenic core of IAPP amyloid fibrils: insights from 12087–12094 (2020).
micro-Raman spectroscopy. J. Struct. Biol. 199, 140–152 (2017). 210. Michaels, T. C. T. et al. Dynamics of oligomer populations formed during the aggregation
176. Ye, X., Hedenqvist, M. S., Langton, M. & Lendel, C. On the role of peptide hydrolysis for of Alzheimer’s Aβ 42 peptide. Nat. Chem. 12, 445–451 (2020).
fibrillation kinetics and amyloid fibril morphology. RSC Adv. 8, 6915–6924 (2018). 211. Crespo, R. et al. What can the kinetics of amyloid fibril formation tell about off-pathway
177. Louros, N. et al. Tau amyloid polymorphism is shaped by local structural propensities of aggregation? J. Biol. Chem. 291, 2018–2032 (2016).
its protein sequence. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.24.512987 (2022). 212. Hasecke, F. et al. Origin of metastable oligomers and their effects on amyloid fibril
178. Michaels, T. C. T. et al. Chemical kinetics for bridging molecular mechanisms and self-assembly. Chem. Sci. 9, 5937–5948 (2018).
macroscopic measurements of amyloid fibril formation. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 69, 213. Hasecke, F. et al. Protofibril–fibril interactions inhibit amyloid fibril assembly by
273–298 (2018). obstructing secondary nucleation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 3016–3021 (2021).
179. Michaels, T. C. T. et al. Fluctuations in the kinetics of linear protein self-assembly. Phys. 214. Konno, H. et al. Dynamics of oligomer and amyloid fibril formation by yeast prion
Rev. Lett. 116, 258103 (2016). Sup35 observed by high-speed atomic force microscopy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,
180. Galvagnion, C. et al. Lipid vesicles trigger α-synuclein aggregation by stimulating 7831–7836 (2020).
primary nucleation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 11, 229–234 (2015). 215. Kayed, R. & Lasagna-Reeves, C. A. Molecular mechanisms of amyloid oligomers toxicity.
181. Louros, N., Schymkowitz, J. & Rousseau, F. Heterotypic amyloid interactions: clues to J. Alzheimers Dis. 33, S67–S78 (2013).
polymorphic bias and selective cellular vulnerability? Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 72, 176–186 216. He, Y. et al. Amyloid β oligomers suppress excitatory transmitter release via presynaptic
(2022). depletion of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate. Nat. Commun. 10, 1193 (2019).
182. Juhl, D. W. et al. Conservation of the amyloid interactome across diverse fibrillar 217. Lasagna-Reeves, C. A. et al. Tau oligomers impair memory and induce synaptic and
structures. Sci. Rep. 9, 3863 (2019). mitochondrial dysfunction in wild-type mice. Mol. Neurodegener. 6, 39 (2011).
183. Chatterjee, D. et al. Co-aggregation and secondary nucleation in the life cycle of human 218. Cascella, R., Bigi, A., Cremades, N. & Cecchi, C. Effects of oligomer toxicity, fibril toxicity
prolactin/galanin functional amyloids. eLife 11, e73835 (2022). and fibril spreading in synucleinopathies. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 79, 174 (2022).
184. Pansieri, J. et al. Templating S100A9 amyloids on Aβ fibrillar surfaces revealed by charge 219. Wagner, J. et al. Medin co-aggregates with vascular amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s disease.
detection mass spectrometry, microscopy, kinetic and microfluidic analyses. Chem. Sci. Nature 612, 123–131 (2022).
11, 7031–7039 (2020). 220. Konstantoulea, K., Louros, N., Rousseau, F. & Schymkowitz, J. Heterotypic interactions in
185. Linse, S. Monomer-dependent secondary nucleation in amyloid formation. Biophys. Rev. amyloid function and disease. FEBS J. 289, 2025–2046 (2022).
9, 329–338 (2017). 221. Clinton, L. K., Blurton-Jones, M., Myczek, K., Trojanowski, J. Q. & LaFerla, F. M. Synergistic
186. Törnquist, M. & Linse, S. Chiral selectivity of secondary nucleation in amyloid fibril Interactions between Aβ, tau, and α-synuclein: acceleration of neuropathology and
propagation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 60, 24008–24011 (2021). cognitive decline. J. Neurosci. 30, 7281–7289 (2010).
187. Thacker, D. et al. The role of fibril structure and surface hydrophobicity in secondary 222. Zhao, Y. et al. β 2-Microglobulin coaggregates with Aβ and contributes to amyloid
nucleation of amyloid fibrils. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 25272–25283 (2020). pathology and cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease model mice. Nat. Neurosci.
188. Louros, N. et al. Mapping the sequence specificity of heterotypic amyloid interactions https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-023-01352-1 (2023).
enables the identification of aggregation modifiers. Nat. Commun. 13, 1351 (2022). 223. Yu, A. et al. Tau protein aggregates inhibit the protein-folding and vesicular trafficking
189. Tian, Y. & Viles, J. H. pH dependence of amyloid-β fibril assembly kinetics: unravelling the arms of the cellular proteostasis network. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 7917–7930 (2019).
microscopic molecular processes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61, e202210675 (2022). 224. Engstrom, A. K. et al. The inhibition of LSD1 via sequestration contributes to tau-mediated
190. Kumari, P. et al. Structural insights into α-synuclein monomer–fibril interactions. neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 29133–29143 (2020).
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2012171118 (2021). 225. Peng, C. et al. Cellular milieu imparts distinct pathological α-synuclein strains in
191. Hadi Alijanvand, S., Peduzzo, A. & Buell, A. K. Secondary nucleation and the conservation α-synucleinopathies. Nature 557, 558–563 (2018).
of structural characteristics of amyloid fibril strains. Front. Mol. Biosci. https://doi.org/ 226. Lengyel, Z., Rufo, C. M. & Korendovych, I. V. Preparation and screening of catalytic
10.3389/fmolb.2021.669994 (2021). amyloid assemblies. Methods Mol. Biol. 1777, 261–270 (2018).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 930

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
227. Dolan, M. A. et al. Catalytic nanoassemblies formed by short peptides promote highly 260. Mahul-Mellier, A.-L. et al. The process of Lewy body formation, rather than simply
enantioselective transfer hydrogenation. ACS Nano 13, 9292–9297 (2019). α-synuclein fibrillization, is one of the major drivers of neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl
228. Arad, E., Baruch Leshem, A., Rapaport, H. & Jelinek, R. β-Amyloid fibrils catalyze Acad. Sci. USA 117, 4971–4982 (2020).
neurotransmitter degradation. Chem. Catal. 1, 908–922 (2021). 261. Man, W. K. et al. The docking of synaptic vesicles on the presynaptic membrane induced
229. Kollmer, M. et al. Electron tomography reveals the fibril structure and lipid interactions in by α-synuclein is modulated by lipid composition. Nat. Commun. 12, 927 (2021).
amyloid deposits. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 5604–5609 (2016). 262. Choong, C.-J. et al. Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate interacts with α-synuclein
230. Bäuerlein, F. J. B. et al. In situ architecture and cellular interactions of PolyQ inclusions. and initiates its aggregation and formation of Parkinson’s disease-related fibril
Cell 171, 179–187.e10 (2017). polymorphism. Acta Neuropathol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-023-02555-3 (2023).
231. Seidler, P. M. et al. Structure-based inhibitors of tau aggregation. Nat. Chem. 10, 170–176 263. Das, M. & Gursky, O. Amyloid-forming properties of human apolipoproteins: sequence
(2018). analyses and structural insights. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 855, 175–211 (2015).
232. Agerschou, E. D. et al. An engineered monomer binding-protein for α-synuclein efficiently 264. Louros, N. N. et al. Chameleon ‘aggregation-prone’ segments of apoA-I: a model of
inhibits the proliferation of amyloid fibrils. eLife https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.46112 (2019). amyloid fibrils formed in apoA-I amyloidosis. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 79, 711–718 (2015).
233. Lu, J. et al. Structure-based peptide inhibitor design of amyloid-β aggregation. 265. Kenyaga, J. M., Cheng, Q. & Qiang, W. Early stage β-amyloid–membrane interactions
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 12, 54 (2019). modulate lipid dynamics and influence structural interfaces and fibrillation. J. Biol.
234. Saelices, L. et al. A pair of peptides inhibits seeding of the hormone transporter Chem. 298, 102491 (2022).
transthyretin into amyloid fibrils. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 6130–6141 (2019). 266. Antonschmidt, L. et al. Insights into the molecular mechanism of amyloid filament
235. Krotee, P. et al. Common fibrillar spines of amyloid-β and human islet amyloid formation: segmental folding of α-synuclein on lipid membranes. Sci. Adv. 7, eabg2174
polypeptide revealed by microelectron diffraction and structure-based inhibitors. (2021).
J. Biol. Chem. 293, 2888–2902 (2018). 267. Korshavn, K. J. et al. Reduced lipid bilayer thickness regulates the aggregation and
236. Mompeán, M. et al. The structure of the necrosome RIPK1–RIPK3 core, a human cytotoxicity of amyloid-β. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 4638–4650 (2017).
hetero-amyloid signaling complex. Cell 173, 1244–1253.e10 (2018). 268. Sienski, G. et al. APOE4 disrupts intracellular lipid homeostasis in human iPSC-derived
237. Cerofolini, L. et al. Mixing Aβ 1–40 and Aβ1–42 peptides generates unique amyloid fibrils. glia. Sci. Transl. Med. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz4564 (2021).
Chem. Commun. 56, 8830–8833 (2020). 269. Blanchard, J. W. et al. APOE4 impairs myelination via cholesterol dysregulation in
238. Ziaunys, M., Mikalauskaite, K. & Smirnovas, V. Amyloidophilic molecule interactions on oligodendrocytes. Nature 611, 769–779 (2022).
the surface of insulin fibrils: cooperative binding and fluorescence quenching. Sci. Rep. 270. Liu, C. C. et al. ApoE4 accelerates early seeding of amyloid pathology. Neuron 96,
9, 20303 (2019). 1024–1032.e23 (2017).
239. Fichou, Y. et al. Tau-cofactor complexes as building blocks of tau fibrils. Front. Neurosci. 271. Verghese, P. B. et al. ApoE influences amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/
13, 1339 (2019). Aβ association in physiological conditions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, E1807–E1816
240. Yamaguchi, K. et al. Polyphosphates induce amyloid fibril formation of α-synuclein in (2013).
concentration-dependent distinct manners. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100510 (2021). 272. Wu, J. et al. Cryo-electron microscopy imaging of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β 42 oligomer
241. Matafora, V. et al. Amyloid aggregates accumulate in melanoma metastasis modulating displayed on a functionally and structurally relevant scaffold. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60,
YAP activity. EMBO Rep. 21, e50446 (2020). 18680–18687 (2021).
242. Wegmann, S., Medalsy, I. D., Mandelkow, E. & Müller, D. J. The fuzzy coat of pathological 273. Laganowsky, A. et al. Atomic view of a toxic amyloid small oligomer. Science 335,
human Tau fibrils is a two-layered polyelectrolyte brush. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 1228–1231 (2012).
E313–E321 (2013). 274. Chen, S. W. et al. Structural characterization of toxic oligomers that are kinetically
243. Khan, M. R. et al. Amyloidogenic oligomerization transforms Drosophila Orb2 from a trapped during α-synuclein fibril formation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, E1994–E2003
translation repressor to an activator. Cell 163, 1468–1483 (2015). (2015).
244. Wentink, A., Nussbaum-Krammer, C. & Bukau, B. Modulation of amyloid states by 275. Fusco, G. et al. Structural basis of membrane disruption and cellular toxicity by
molecular chaperones. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1101/ α-synuclein oligomers. Science 358, 1440–1443 (2017).
cshperspect.a033969 (2019). 276. De, S. et al. Different soluble aggregates of Aβ 42 can give rise to cellular toxicity through
245. Ayyadevara, S., Ganne, A., Balasubramaniam, M. & Shmookler Reis, R. J. Intrinsically different mechanisms. Nat. Commun. 10, 1541 (2019).
disordered proteins identified in the aggregate proteome serve as biomarkers of 277. Birol, M., Kumar, S., Rhoades, E. & Miranker, A. D. Conformational switching within
neurodegeneration. Metab. Brain Dis. 37, 147–152 (2022). dynamic oligomers underpins toxic gain-of-function by diabetes-associated amyloid.
246. Jiang, L. L., Guan, W. L., Wang, J. Y., Zhang, S. X. & Hu, H. Y. RNA-assisted sequestration Nat. Commun. 9, 1312 (2018).
of RNA-binding proteins by cytoplasmic inclusions of the C-terminal 35-kDa fragment of 278. Elenbaas, B. O. W., Kremsreiter, S. M., Khemtemourian, L., Killian, J. A. & Sinnige, T. Fibril
TDP-43. J. Cell Sci. 135, jcs259380 (2022). elongation by human islet amyloid polypeptide is the main event linking aggregation to
247. Niss, F., Zaidi, W., Hallberg, E. & Ström, A. L. Polyglutamine expanded Ataxin-7 induces membrane damage. BBA Adv. 3, 100083 (2023).
DNA damage and alters FUS localization and function. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 110, 103584 279. Koike, H. & Katsuno, M. The ultrastructure of tissue damage by amyloid fibrils. Molecules
(2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26154611 (2021).
248. Nihei, Y. et al. Poly-glycine-alanine exacerbates C9orf72 repeat expansion-mediated 280. Frieg, B. et al. The 3D structure of lipidic fibrils of α-synuclein. Nat. Commun. 13, 6810
DNA damage via sequestration of phosphorylated ATM and loss of nuclear hnRNPA3. (2022).
Acta Neuropathol. 139, 99–118 (2020). 281. Shahmoradian, S. H. et al. Lewy pathology in Parkinson’s disease consists of crowded
249. Agarwal, A., Arora, L., Rai, S. K., Avni, A. & Mukhopadhyay, S. Spatiotemporal modulations organelles and lipid membranes. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1099–1109 (2019).
in heterotypic condensates of prion and α-synuclein control phase transitions and 282. Lee, J.-E. et al. Mapping surface hydrophobicity of α-synuclein oligomers at the
amyloid conversion. Nat. Commun. 13, 1154 (2022). nanoscale. Nano Lett. 18, 7494–7501 (2018).
250. Mathieu, C., Pappu, R. V. & Taylor, J. P. Beyond aggregation: pathological phase 283. Habchi, J. et al. Cholesterol catalyses Aβ 42 aggregation through a heterogeneous
transitions in neurodegenerative disease. Science 370, 56–60 (2020). nucleation pathway in the presence of lipid membranes. Nat. Chem. 10, 673–683
251. Yue, H.-W., Hong, J.-Y., Zhang, S.-X., Jiang, L.-L. & Hu, H.-Y. PolyQ-expanded proteins (2018).
impair cellular proteostasis of ataxin-3 through sequestering the co-chaperone HSJ1 284. Limbocker, R. et al. Trodusquemine enhances Aβ 42 aggregation but suppresses its
into aggregates. Sci. Rep. 11, 7815 (2021). toxicity by displacing oligomers from cell membranes. Nat. Commun. 10, 225 (2019).
252. Ferdosh, S., Banerjee, S., Singh, J. & Barat, C. Amyloid protein-induced sequestration of 285. Ganz, T. et al. Microbial pathogens induce neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease
the eukaryotic ribosome: effect of stoichiometry and polyphenolic inhibitors. FEBS Lett. mice: protection by microglial regulation. J. Neuroinflammation 19, 5 (2022).
596, 1190–1202 (2022). 286. Brown, G. C. The endotoxin hypothesis of neurodegeneration. J. Neuroinflammation 16,
253. Guo, Q. et al. In situ structure of neuronal C9orf72 poly-GA aggregates reveals 180 (2019).
proteasome recruitment. Cell 172, 696–705.e12 (2018). 287. Yao, L. et al. Protective effects of endotoxin tolerance on peripheral
254. Riemenschneider, H. et al. Gel-like inclusions of C-terminal fragments of TDP-43 lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammation and dopaminergic neuronal injury.
sequester stalled proteasomes in neurons. EMBO Rep. 23, e53890 (2022). Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol. 44, 326–337 (2022).
255. Thibaudeau, T. A., Anderson, R. T. & Smith, D. M. A common mechanism of proteasome 288. Kim, C. et al. Exposure to bacterial endotoxin generates a distinct strain of α-synuclein
impairment by neurodegenerative disease-associated oligomers. Nat. Commun. 9, 1097 fibril. Sci. Rep. 6, 30891 (2016).
(2018). 289. Cheng, N., Liang, Y., Du, X. & Ye, R. D. Serum amyloid A promotes LPS clearance and
256. Riera-Tur, I. et al. Amyloid-like aggregating proteins cause lysosomal defects in neurons suppresses LPS-induced inflammation and tissue injury. EMBO Rep. 19, e45517
via gain-of-function toxicity. Life Sci. Alliance 5, e202101185 (2022). (2018).
257. Koss, D. J. et al. RAB39B is redistributed in dementia with Lewy bodies and is sequestered 290. Cammann, D. et al. Genetic correlations between Alzheimer’s disease and gut
within aβ plaques and Lewy bodies. Brain Pathol. 31, 120–132 (2021). microbiome genera. Sci. Rep. 13, 5258 (2023).
258. Morten, M. J. et al. Quantitative super-resolution imaging of pathological aggregates 291. Wallen, Z. D. et al. Metagenomics of Parkinson’s disease implicates the gut microbiome
reveals distinct toxicity profiles in different synucleinopathies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA in multiple disease mechanisms. Nat. Commun. 13, 6958 (2022).
119, e2205591119 (2022). 292. Wang, X. et al. Sodium oligomannate therapeutically remodels gut microbiota and
259. Suzuki, G. et al. α-Synuclein strains that cause distinct pathologies differentially inhibit suppresses gut bacterial amino acids-shaped neuroinflammation to inhibit Alzheimer’s
proteasome. eLife 9, e56825 (2020). disease progression. Cell Res. 29, 787–803 (2019).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 931

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
293. Claesson, M. J. et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in the 328. Piller, C. Blots on a field? Science 377, 358–363 (2022).
elderly. Nature 488, 178–184 (2012). 329. Niu, Z. et al. Structural insight into IAPP-derived amyloid inhibitors and their mechanism
294. Seo, D. O. et al. ApoE isoform- and microbiota-dependent progression of of action. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 59, 5771–5781 (2020).
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Science 379, eadd1236 (2023). 330. Perchiacca, J. M., Ladiwala, A. R., Bhattacharya, M. & Tessier, P. M. Structure-based design
295. Sampson, T. R. et al. A gut bacterial amyloid promotes α-synuclein aggregation and of conformation- and sequence-specific antibodies against amyloidβ. Proc. Natl Acad.
motor impairment in mice. eLife 9, e53111 (2020). Sci. USA 109, 84–89 (2012).
296. Perov, S. et al. Structural insights into curli CsgA cross-β fibril architecture inspire 331. Limbocker, R. et al. Rationally designed antibodies as research tools to study the
repurposing of anti-amyloid compounds as anti-biofilm agents. PLoS Pathog. 15, structure-toxicity relationship of amyloid-β oligomers. Int. J. Mol. Sci. https://doi.org/
e1007978 (2019). 10.3390/ijms21124542 (2020).
297. Bhoite, S. S., Han, Y., Ruotolo, B. T. & Chapman, M. R. Mechanistic insights into 332. Aprile, F. A. et al. Rational design of a conformation-specific antibody for the
accelerated α-synuclein aggregation mediated by human microbiome-associated quantification of Aβ oligomers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 13509–13518 (2020).
functional amyloids. J. Biol. Chem. 298, 102088 (2022). 333. Taglialegna, A., Lasa, I. & Valle, J. Amyloid structures as biofilm matrix scaffolds.
298. Evans, M. L. et al. The bacterial curli system possesses a potent and selective inhibitor of J. Bacteriol. 198, 2579–2588 (2016).
amyloid formation. Mol. Cell 57, 445–455 (2015). 334. Levkovich, S. A., Gazit, E. & Laor Bar-Yosef, D. Two decades of studying functional
299. Kumar, D. K. et al. Amyloid-β peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and amyloids in microorganisms. Trends Microbiol. 29, 251–265 (2021).
worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 340ra372 (2016). 335. Louros, N. N. et al. A common ‘aggregation-prone’ interface possibly participates
300. Bücker, R. et al. The cryo-EM structures of two amphibian antimicrobial cross-β amyloid in the self-assembly of human zona pellucida proteins. FEBS Lett. 590, 619–630
fibrils. Nat. Commun. 13, 4356 (2022). (2016).
301. Pastore, A., Raimondi, F., Rajendran, L. & Temussi, P. A. Why does the Aβ peptide of 336. Louros, N. N., Iconomidou, V. A., Giannelou, P. & Hamodrakas, S. J. Structural analysis of
Alzheimer share structural similarity with antimicrobial peptides? Commun. Biol. 3, 135 peptide-analogues of human zona pellucida ZP1 protein with amyloidogenic properties:
(2020). insights into mammalian zona pellucida formation. PLoS ONE 8, e73258 (2013).
302. Tang, Y., Zhang, D., Gong, X. & Zheng, J. Repurposing of intestinal defensins as 337. Louros, N. N. et al. Structural studies of “aggregation-prone” peptide-analogues of
multi-target, dual-function amyloid inhibitors via cross-seeding. Chem. Sci. 13, 7143–7156 teleostean egg chorion ZPB proteins. Biopolymers 102, 427–436 (2014).
(2022). 338. Maji, S. K. et al. Functional amyloids as natural storage of peptide hormones in pituitary
303. Colombo, A. V. et al. Microbiota-derived short chain fatty acids modulate microglia and secretory granules. Science 325, 328–332 (2009).
promote Aβ plaque deposition. eLife 10, e59826 (2021). 339. Nasi, G. I. et al. Arabidopsis thaliana plant natriuretic peptide active domain forms
304. Sade, D., Shaham-Niv, S., Arnon, Z. A., Tavassoly, O. & Gazit, E. Seeding of proteins amyloid-like fibrils in a pH-dependent manner. Plants https://doi.org/10.3390/
into amyloid structures by metabolite assemblies may clarify certain unexplained plants11010009 (2021).
epidemiological associations. Open Biol. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.170229 (2018). 340. Wickner, R. B. et al. Yeast prions: structure, biology, and prion-handling systems.
305. Tavassoly, O. et al. Quinolinic acid amyloid-like fibrillar assemblies seed α-synuclein Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 79, 1–17 (2015).
aggregation. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 3847–3862 (2018). 341. Si, K., Lindquist, S. & Kandel, E. R. A neuronal isoform of the aplysia CPEB has prion-like
306. Zhu, G., Zhao, J., Zhang, H., Wang, G. & Chen, W. Gut microbiota and its metabolites: properties. Cell 115, 879–891 (2003).
bridge of dietary nutrients and Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Nutr. 14, 819–839 (2023). 342. Kajava, A. V. & Steven, A. C. β-Rolls, β-helices, and other β-solenoid proteins. Adv. Protein
307. Rising, A. et al. AA amyloid in human food chain is a possible biohazard. Sci. Rep. 11, Chem. 73, 55–96 (2006).
21069 (2021). 343. Louros, N. N., Baltoumas, F. A., Hamodrakas, S. J. & Iconomidou, V. A. A β-solenoid model
308. Rahman, M. M. et al. Food protein-derived amyloids do not accelerate amyloid β of the Pmel17 repeat domain: insights to the formation of functional amyloid fibrils.
aggregation. Sci. Rep. 13, 985 (2023). J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 30, 153–164 (2016).
309. Vaneyck, J., Segers-Nolten, I., Broersen, K. & Claessens, M. M. A. E. Cross-seeding of 344. Van Melckebeke, H. et al. Atomic-resolution three-dimensional structure of
α-synuclein aggregation by amyloid fibrils of food proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100358 HET-s(218−289) amyloid fibrils by solid-state NMR spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132,
(2021). 13765–13775 (2010).
310. Monge-Morera, M. et al. Heating wheat gluten promotes the formation of amyloid-like 345. Tsiolaki, P. L., Louros, N. N. & Iconomidou, V. A. Hexapeptide tandem repeats dictate the
fibrils. ACS Omega 6, 1823–1833 (2021). formation of silkmoth chorion, a natural protective amyloid. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 3774–3783
311. Lambrecht, M. A. et al. Hydrothermal treatments cause wheat gluten-derived peptides to (2018).
form amyloid-like fibrils. J. Agric. Food Chem. 69, 1963–1974 (2021). 346. Louros, N. N. & Iconomidou, V. A. Identification of an amyloid fibril forming segment of
312. Lambrecht, M. A. et al. Conditions governing food protein amyloid fibril formation. Part II: human Pmel17 repeat domain (RPT domain). Biopolymers 106, 133–139 (2016).
milk and legume proteins. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18, 1277–1291 (2019). 347. Sleutel, M., Pradhan, B. & Remaut, H. Structural analysis of the bacterial amyloid curli.
313. Jansens, K. J. A. et al. Conditions governing food protein amyloid fibril formation—part I: Nat. Commun. 14, 2822 (2022).
egg and cereal proteins. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18, 1256–1276 (2019). 348. Louros, N. N., Bolas, G. M. P., Tsiolaki, P. L., Hamodrakas, S. J. & Iconomidou, V. A. Intrinsic
314. Cao, Y. & Mezzenga, R. Food protein amyloid fibrils: origin, structure, formation, aggregation propensity of the CsgB nucleator protein is crucial for curli fiber formation.
characterization, applications and health implications. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 269, J. Struct. Biol. 195, 179–189 (2016).
334–356 (2019). 349. Ragonis-Bachar, P. & Landau, M. Functional and pathological amyloid structures in the
315. Ye, X. et al. High‐temperature and chemically resistant foams from sustainable eyes of 2020 cryo-EM. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 68, 184–193 (2021).
nanostructured protein. Adv. Sustain. Syst. https://doi.org/10.1002/adsu.202100063 350. Garcia-Pardo, J. et al. Cryo-EM structure of hnRNPDL-2 fibrils, a functional amyloid
(2021). associated with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy D3. Nat. Commun. 14, 239 (2023).
316. Ezzat, K. et al. The viral protein corona directs viral pathogenesis and amyloid 351. Lu, J. et al. CryoEM structure of the low-complexity domain of hnRNPA2 and its
aggregation. Nat. Commun. 10, 2331 (2019). conversion to pathogenic amyloid. Nat. Commun. 11, 4090 (2020).
317. Yu, H. & Wu, J. Amyloid-β: a double agent in Alzheimer’s disease? Biomed. Pharmacother. 352. Hervas, R. et al. Cryo-EM structure of a neuronal functional amyloid implicated in
139, 111575 (2021). memory persistence in Drosophila. Science 367, 1230–1234 (2020).
318. Semerdzhiev, S. A., Fakhree, M. A. A., Segers-Nolten, I., Blum, C. & Claessens, M. M. A. E. 353. Seuring, C. et al. The three-dimensional structure of human β-endorphin amyloid fibrils.
Interactions between SARS-CoV-2 N-protein and α-synuclein accelerate amyloid Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 1178–1184 (2020).
formation. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 13, 143–150 (2022). 354. Liu, Y., Liu, J. & He, X. Different pK a shifts of internal GLU8 in human β-endorphin amyloid
319. Bhardwaj, T. et al. Amyloidogenic proteins in the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 proteomes. revealing a coupling of internal ionization and stepwise fibril disassembly. J. Phys. Chem. B
Nat. Commun. 14, 945 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.2c06706 (2023).
320. Nyström, S. & Hammarström, P. Amyloidogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. J. Am. 355. Noji, M. et al. Breakdown of supersaturation barrier links protein folding to amyloid
Chem. Soc. 144, 8945–8950 (2022). formation. Commun. Biol. 4, 120 (2021).
321. Nilsson, J. F. et al. Molecular determinants of fibrillation in a viral amyloidogenic domain 356. Hardy, J. Expression of normal sequence pathogenic proteins for neurodegenerative
from combined biochemical and biophysical studies. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (2023). disease contributes to disease risk: ’permissive templating’ as a general mechanism
322. Leblanc, P. & Vorberg, I. M. Viruses in neurodegenerative diseases: more than just underlying neurodegeneration. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 33, 578–581 (2005).
suspects in crimes. PLoS Pathog. 18, e1010670 (2022). 357. Ciryam, P., Tartaglia, G. G., Morimoto, R. I., Dobson, C. M. & Vendruscolo, M. Widespread
323. Liu, S. et al. Highly efficient intercellular spreading of protein misfolding mediated by aggregation and neurodegenerative diseases are associated with supersaturated
viral ligand–receptor interactions. Nat. Commun. 12, 5739 (2021). proteins. Cell Rep. 5, 781–790 (2013).
324. Damy, T. et al. Efficacy and safety of tafamidis doses in the Tafamidis in Transthyretin 358. Ciryam, P. et al. A transcriptional signature of Alzheimer’s disease is associated with
Cardiomyopathy Clinical Trial (ATTR-ACT) and long-term extension study. Eur. J. Heart a metastable subproteome at risk for aggregation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
Fail. 23, 277–285 (2021). 4753–4758 (2016).
325. Torres, L. & Conran, N. Emerging pharmacotherapeutic approaches for the management 359. Freer, R. et al. Supersaturated proteins are enriched at synapses and underlie cell and
of sickle cell disease. Expert. Opin. Pharmacother. 20, 173–186 (2019). tissue vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease. Heliyon 5, e02589 (2019).
326. van Dyck, C. H. et al. Lecanemab in early Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 9–21 360. Ciryam, P. et al. Spinal motor neuron protein supersaturation patterns are associated
(2022). with inclusion body formation in ALS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3935–E3943
327. Mullard, A. Anti-tau antibody failures stack up. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20, 888 (2021). (2017).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 932

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
361. Walther, D. M. et al. Widespread proteome remodeling and aggregation in aging 389. Pilkington, S. M., Roberts, S. J., Meade, S. J. & Gerrard, J. A. Amyloid fibrils as a
C. elegans. Cell 161, 919–932 (2015). nanoscaffold for enzyme immobilization. Biotechnol. Prog. 26, 93–100 (2010).
362. Kundra, R., Ciryam, P., Morimoto, R. I., Dobson, C. M. & Vendruscolo, M. Protein 390. Goswami, S., Reja, A., Pal, S., Singh, A. & Das, D. Nonequilibrium amyloid polymers
homeostasis of a metastable subproteome associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. exploit dynamic covalent linkage to temporally control charge-selective catalysis.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E5703–E5711 (2017). J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 19248–19252 (2022).
363. Huiting, W. et al. Targeting DNA topoisomerases or checkpoint kinases results in an 391. Zozulia, O., Marshall, L. R., Kim, I., Kohn, E. M. & Korendovych, I. V. Self-assembling
overload of chaperone systems, triggering aggregation of a metastable subproteome. catalytic peptide nanomaterials capable of highly efficient peroxidase activity. Chemistry
eLife 11, e70726 (2022). 27, 5388–5392 (2021).
364. Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 392. Zozulia, O. & Korendovych, I. V. Semi-rationally designed short peptides self-assemble
583–589 (2021). and bind hemin to promote cyclopropanation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 59, 8108–8112
365. Akdel, M. et al. A structural biology community assessment of AlphaFold2 applications. (2020).
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 29, 1056–1067 (2022). 393. Sarkhel, B., Chatterjee, A. & Das, D. Covalent catalysis by cross β amyloid nanotubes.
366. Ma, P., Li, D.-W. & Brüschweiler, R. Predicting protein flexibility with AlphaFold. Proteins J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 4098–4103 (2020).
Struct. Funct. Bioinforma. 91, 847–855 (2023). 394. Heerde, T., Bansal, A., Schmidt, M. & Fandrich, M. Cryo-EM structure of a catalytic
367. Guo, H.-B. et al. AlphaFold2 models indicate that protein sequence determines both amyloid fibril. Sci. Rep. 13, 4070 (2023).
structure and dynamics. Sci. Rep. 12, 10696 (2022). 395. Huyst, A. M. R. et al. Impact of heat and enzymatic treatment on ovalbumin amyloid-like
368. Terwilliger, T. C. et al. Improved AlphaFold modeling with implicit experimental fibril formation and enzyme-induced gelation. Food Hydrocoll. 131, 107784 (2022).
information. Nat. Methods 19, 1376–1382 (2022). 396. Monge-Morera, M. et al. Processing induced changes in food proteins: amyloid formation
369. Baek, M. et al. Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a during boiling of hen egg white. Biomacromolecules 21, 2218–2228 (2020).
three-track neural network. Science 373, 871–876 (2021). 397. Jansens, K. J. A. et al. Rational design of amyloid-like fibrillary structures for tailoring
370. Mirdita, M. et al. ColabFold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nat. Methods 19, food protein techno-functionality and their potential health implications. Compr. Rev.
679–682 (2022). Food Sci. F. 18, 84–105 (2019).
371. Wang, W., Peng, Z. & Yang, J. Single-sequence protein structure prediction using 398. Luyckx, T. et al. Bioavailability and health impact of ingested amyloid-like protein fibrils
supervised transformer protein language models. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 804–814 (2022). and their link with inflammatory status: a need for more research? Mol. Nutr. Food Res.
372. Richard, E. et al. Protein complex prediction with AlphaFold-Multimer. Preprint at bioRxiv 66, e2101032 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.04.463034 (2022). 399. Ganesan, A. et al. Selectivity of aggregation-determining interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 427,
373. Bryant, P., Pozzati, G. & Elofsson, A. Improved prediction of protein–protein interactions 236–247 (2015).
using AlphaFold2. Nat. Commun. 13, 1265 (2022). 400. Wu, G. et al. Investigating the mechanism of action of aggregation-inducing
374. Bryant, P. et al. Predicting the structure of large protein complexes using AlphaFold and antimicrobial Pept-ins. Cell Chem. Biol. 28, 524–536.e4 (2021).
Monte Carlo tree search. Nat. Commun. 13, 6028 (2022). 401. Bednarska, N. G. et al. Protein aggregation as an antibiotic design strategy. Mol. Microbiol.
375. Hekkelman, M. L., de Vries, I., Joosten, R. P. & Perrakis, A. AlphaFill: enriching AlphaFold https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.13269 (2015).
models with ligands and cofactors. Nat. Methods 20, 205–213 (2023). 402. Siemons, M. et al. Synthetic Pept-ins as a generic amyloid-like aggregation-based
376. Minkyung, B., Ryan, M., Ivan, A., David, B. & Frank, D. Accurate prediction of nucleic acid platform for in vivo PET imaging of intracellular targets. Bioconjug. Chem. 32,
and protein-nucleic acid complexes using RoseTTAFoldNA. Preprint at bioRxiv https:// 2052–2064 (2021).
doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.09.507333 (2022).
377. Madani, A. et al. Large language models generate functional protein sequences across Author contributions
diverse families. Nat. Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01618-2 (2023). All authors researched data for the article, made a substantial contribution to discussion of
378. Pinheiro, F., Santos, J. & Ventura, S. AlphaFold and the amyloid landscape. J. Mol. Biol. content, and wrote and reviewed/edited the manuscript before submission.
433, 167059 (2021).
379. Wojciechowski, J. W. & Kotulska, M. PATH—prediction of amyloidogenicity by threading Competing interests
and machine learning. Sci. Rep. 10, 7721 (2020). The authors declare no competing interests.
380. Navarro, S. & Ventura, S. Computational methods to predict protein aggregation. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 73, 102343 (2022). Additional information
381. Meng, F. & Chung, H. S. Kinetics of amyloid β from deep learning. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1, Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
20–21 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-023-00647-2.
382. Huda, A. et al. A machine learning model for identifying patients at risk for wild-type
transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy. Nat. Commun. 12, 2725 (2021). Peer review information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks Tessa Sinnige; Olga
383. Kim, N. H. et al. PET-validated EEG-machine learning algorithm predicts brain amyloid Gursky, who co-reviewed with Emily Lewkowicz; and Halfmann, who co-reviewed with Shriram
pathology in pre-dementia Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 13, 10299 (2023). Venkatesan and Alex Von Schulze for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
384. Tang, Z. et al. Interpretable classification of Alzheimer’s disease pathologies with a
convolutional neural network pipeline. Nat. Commun. 10, 2173 (2019). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
385. Zozulia, O., Dolan, M. A. & Korendovych, I. V. Catalytic peptide assemblies. Chem. Soc. published maps and institutional affiliations.
Rev. 47, 3621–3639 (2018).
386. Li, J. & Zhang, F. Amyloids as building blocks for macroscopic functional materials: Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this
designs, applications and challenges. Int. J. Mol. Sci. https://doi.org/10.3390/ article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author
ijms221910698 (2021). self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the
387. Li, J. et al. Microbially synthesized polymeric amyloid fiber promotes β-nanocrystal terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
formation and displays gigapascal tensile strength. ACS Nano 15, 11843–11853 (2021).
388. Sackewitz, M. et al. A folded and functional protein domain in an amyloid-like fibril. © Springer Nature Limited 2023
Protein Sci. 17, 1044–1054 (2008).
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology | Volume 24 | December 2023 | 912–933 933

---PAGE BREAK---

