Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences (2021) 78:427–445
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-020-03599-4 CellularandMolecularLifeSciences
REVIEW
Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions
by phosphorylation and its physiological relevance
Sonali Bahl1 · Edward Seto1
Received: 8 April 2020 / Revised: 2 July 2020 / Accepted: 9 July 2020 / Published online: 18 July 2020
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
Abstract
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are conserved enzymes that regulate many cellular processes by catalyzing the removal of
acetyl groups from lysine residues on histones and non-histone proteins. As appropriate for proteins that occupy such an
essential biological role, HDAC activities and functions are in turn highly regulated. Overwhelming evidence suggests that
the dysregulation of HDACs plays a major role in many human diseases. The regulation of HDACs is achieved by multiple
different mechanisms, including posttranslational modifications. One of the most common posttranslational modifications
on HDACs is reversible phosphorylation. Many HDAC phosphorylations are context-dependent, occurring in specific tissues
or as a consequence of certain stimuli. Additionally, whereas phosphorylation can regulate some HDACs in a non-specific
manner, many HDAC phosphorylations result in specific consequences. Although some of these modifications support normal
HDAC function, aberrations can contribute to disease development. Here we review and critically evaluate how reversible
phosphorylation activates or deactivates HDACs and, thereby, regulates their many functions under various cellular and
physiological contexts.
Keywords Histone deacetylase · Phosphorylation · Epigenetics · Cell signaling
Introduction Sir2 protein and is dependent on NAD+ for its deacetylase
activity [1].
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes that PTMs occur as a response to changing conditions within
have the ability to catalyze posttranslational modifications the cellular microenvironment and can serve as a mechanism
(PTMs) of their target substrates, of which the best known of intracellular communication to elicit biological functions
is lysine deacetylation. The human HDAC family is made up mediated by the target proteins [2–4]. Although HDACs
of 18 enzymes, which were identified and classified based catalyze the addition and removal of PTMs from their tar-
on sequence homology to yeast deacetylases. The Classi- get substrates [1, 5–15], they themselves can undergo the
cal HDAC family includes the Class I, II, and IV HDACs, addition or removal of a variety of modifications on specific
whose deacetylase activity is dependent on Z n2+. The Class I amino acid residues. These modifications include chemi-
HDACs (HDACs 1, 2, 3, and 8) are homologous to the yeast cal groups or proteins, such as an acetyl group or ubiquitin,
Rpd3 protein, whereas the Class II HDACs (HDACs 4, 5, 6, many of which have been characterized in regard to their
7, 9, and 10) are similar to the yeast Hda1 enzyme. The sole effects on target protein characteristics [2]. Many post-
Class IV HDAC is HDAC11, which is similar in sequence translational modifications of HDACs have been identified
to both Classes I and II. The Sirtuin (SIRT) family, also through high-throughput mass spectrometry approaches
referred to as the Class III HDACs, is similar to the yeast using different cell lines, tissue types, and drug treatments.
Some of these sites have been validated and explored in a
functional context.
*
Edward Seto Perhaps one of the best-studied modifications of HDACs
seto@gwu.edu
is phosphorylation. In response to extracellular stimuli, sig-
1 Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine, nal transduction pathways are activated, which can lead to
School of Medicine & Health Sciences, George Washington protein phosphorylation most commonly on target serine
Cancer Center, George Washington University, Washington, (Ser, S), threonine (Thr, T), and tyrosine (Tyr, Y) residues.
DC 20037, USA
Vol.:(0112 33456789)

---PAGE BREAK---

4 28 S. Bahl, E. Seto
In the context of phosphorylation, eukaryotic kinases cata- context of HDAC phosphorylation. Here we discuss the
lyze the addition of phosphate from ATP to these target resi- biochemical and physiological effects of phosphorylation of
dues, proteins containing domains (e.g., SH2) that recognize HDACs to address the similarities and differences among the
the phosphorylated site bind to the modified protein to medi- known regulatory mechanisms and to highlight important
ate signaling, and phosphatases reverse this modification [2, areas for future research and therapeutic relevance. A sum-
3, 16–18]. Extensive studies have gone into understanding mary of the effects of phosphorylation on HDAC attributes
the mechanisms and functions of protein phosphorylation, is provided in Table 1.
and it is well established that due to the additional (− 2)
negative charge introduced through the phosphate, phospho-
Modulation of HDAC enzymatic
rylation can induce the protein to undergo a conformational
and functional activities by phosphorylation
change, which can alter the interactions and activity of the
target protein to elicit a biological response to the stimulus
[2–4, 19–21]. The response of cells to the cascade of sign- Phosphorylation can regulate the activity of HDACs in a
aling events and changes in protein functions contributes variety of settings to generate responses that are specific
to the regulation of cellular functions. This is particularly to the enzyme and cellular environment. In early studies,
critical for the maintenance of healthy cells, where dysregu- serine phosphorylation of Class I HDACs was identified
lation of signaling pathways and consequent changes in the as a mode of regulating their enzymatic activity, although
phosphorylation state of the target protein can give rise to the mechanism and effects of phosphorylation are different
the development of disease states. for each protein. Class I HDACs are members of different
The mechanisms associated with HDAC phosphorylation co-repressor complexes, which augment their deacetylase
have been studied in a variety of cellular contexts and dis- activity and through which they could regulate transcription
ease states. This has led to the identification of class-wide [1]. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are part of the NuRD (nucleo-
characteristics such as the relationship between Class IIa some remodeling and deacetylating), Sin3, CoREST (co-
HDAC phosphorylation and subcellular localization. How- repressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor), and
ever, given the complexity of phosphorylation as a regula- MiDAC (mitotic deacetylase) complexes, whereas HDAC3
tory mechanism and the unique roles of each HDAC, even is part of the SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid and
for those of the same class, there is still much to be discov- thyroid hormone receptors)/N-CoR (nuclear receptor co-
ered and clarified regarding the mechanisms and cellular repressor) complex [1, 22–24]. HDAC1 interactions with
Table 1 Effect of phosphorylation on histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzyme attributes
Class Protein Affected protein attribute References
Class I HDAC1 Deacetylase activity, protein interactions [24, 26, 120]
HDAC2 Deacetylase activity, transcriptional repression activity, [26–29, 68, 110, 120, 130, 152]
protein interactions, acetylation, ubiquitination, protein
stability
HDAC3 Deacetylase activity, protein interactions [31–34, 112]
HDAC8 Enzymatic activity, protein structure [35–37]
Class IIa HDAC4 Protein stability, protein interactions, subcellular locali- [52, 53, 55, 56, 61, 62, 64, 70, 78, 97, 98, 113, 153]
zation
HDAC5 Deacetylase activity, protein interactions, subcellular [54–59, 60, 62, 63, 78, 98, 100, 104, 107, 113, 114, 127,
localization, protein structure 128, 153–158]
HDAC7 Protein interactions, subcellular localization, phospho- [55, 56, 92, 94, 101, 102, 113, 154, 156, 159]
rylation (hierarchical)
HDAC9/MITR Protein interactions, subcellular localization [55, 62, 78, 99, 156]
Class IIb HDAC6 Deacetylase activity [38, 40, 41, 129]
Sirtuin SIRT1 Deacetylase activity, protein interactions, protein stabil- [44–48, 65, 69, 75, 76, 79, 80, 84, 89, 118, 121, 122, 126,
ity, protein structure, subcellular localization 160]
SIRT2 Deacetylase activity, protein stability, protein interac- [50, 51, 72, 95, 96, 161]
tions, subcellular localization
SIRT3 Deacetylase activity [87]
SIRT6 Mono-ADP ribosylation activity, protein interactions, [49, 73, 162]
ubiquitination, protein stability
SIRT7 Subcellular localization, protein stability [74]
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 429
other members of the Sin3, CoREST, and NuRD co-repres- sites [28, 29]. The difference in the findings of these studies
sor complexes (MTA2, RbAp48, mSin3a, and CoREST), could depend on the sites that are modified within HDAC2,
and consequently its deacetylase activity, were found to whereas Tsai et al. demonstrated that the phosphorylation
be dependent on its phosphorylation at S421 and S423 by of S394 affected HDAC2 activity [27], Adenuga et al. found
casein kinase 2 (CK2) [24]. Interestingly, discrepancies in that mutation of this site under the condition of oxidative
the identified effect of phosphorylation on HDAC1 have stress did not notably affect HDAC2 phosphorylation lev-
been associated with the substrate and conditions tested. els [28]. Instead, they found that the double mutation of
Pflum et al. found that S421 and S423 phosphorylation is S422 and S424 to alanine (A) in conjunction with the S394A
necessary for HDAC1 activity towards isolated hyperacety- mutation or C-terminal truncation had a notable reduction
lated core histones, where mutation of these sites to alanine in the overall phosphorylation level of HDAC2, suggesting
to mimic the loss of phosphorylation diminished its activity that these are the key residues under this condition [28]. Of
(Fig. 1) [24]. In contrast, alkaline phosphatase treatment did note, it is interesting that the phosphorylation of HDAC1
not alter HDAC1 deacetylase activity towards a synthetic and HDAC2, which share 85% sequence similarity [30], at
acetylated histone H4 N-terminal peptide [25]. However, corresponding sites (S421 and S423 in HDAC1 and S422
Galasinski et al. found soon after that the activity of sensitive and S424 in HDAC2) leads to opposite effects on their enzy-
deacetylases—identified as HDAC1 and HDAC2—follow- matic activity. It may be that these proteins are specifically
ing okadaic acid phosphatase inhibitor treatment increased regulated, rather than through a common mechanism. Alter-
towards their acetylated histone H4 N-terminal peptide, but natively, since these studies were carried out in different
not isolated hyperacetylated histones [26]. contexts, it is possible that the environmental condition may
There is a similar discrepancy in the findings of the effect have influenced the outcome and that the effect could vary
of HDAC2 phosphorylation on its activity. A study by Tsai by stimulus or cell type.
et al. led to the finding that HDAC2 phosphorylation at S394 Unlike HDAC1 and HDAC2, there has been greater
by CK2 is necessary for its deacetylase activity towards consensus regarding the effect of phosphorylation on the
core histones and its interactions with mSin3 and Mi2, activity of the other Class I HDACs, HDAC3, and HDAC8.
members of co-repressor complexes. However, they found HDAC3 phosphorylation is important for its deacetylase
that S394 phosphorylation does not impact its transcrip- activity towards core histones [31]. Specifically, phos-
tional repression activity [27]. In another study, Adenuga phorylation of the HDAC3-H1.3 complex by CK2 during
et al. corroborated that HDAC2 phosphorylation by CK2 is mitosis has been associated with histone H3K9 deacety-
important for its interactions with other proteins, including lation, and phosphorylation of HDAC3 by leucine-rich
HDAC1 and p53 [28]. In contrast, however, they found that repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) in neurons was associated with
HDAC2 phosphorylation stimulated by oxidative stress due the deacetylation of histone H4K5 and histone H4K12
to cigarette smoke extract treatment was associated with its [32, 33]. Similarly, tyrosine phosphorylation of HDAC3
reduced deacetylase activity and higher global histone H4 by proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src (c-Src)
acetylation, as measured by a fluorometric assay, but higher in the SKBR3 human epidermal growth factor receptor
transrepression activity using a reporter with Gal4-binding 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer cell line increases its
Fig. 1 Increased deacetylase activity of HDAC1 upon phosphoryla- Histone deacetylation leads to tighter binding of the DNA and histone
tion. Phosphorylation of HDAC1 at S421 and S423 by CK2 has been proteins in a “closed conformation,” such that gene transcription is
demonstrated to be necessary for its activity in deacetylating histones. repressed [24]. P phosphate, Ac acetyl group
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 30 S. Bahl, E. Seto
activity, as measured by a fluorometric assay kit specific Similar to SIRT1, the role of SIRT6 in DNA damage
for HDAC3 [34]. Unlike the other Class I HDACs, HDAC8 response can also be affected by its phosphorylation state.
is phosphorylated by cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent pro- A study by Van Meter et al. showed that SIRT6 is phospho-
tein kinase A (PKA), which is associated with its reduced rylated at S10 by c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) following
deacetylase activity towards histones H3 and H4 [35, 36]. the induction of oxidative stress by paraquat treatment. This
It has been suggested that this effect may be due to a struc- modification increases the mono-ADP ribosylation activity
tural change induced by the phosphorylation of HDAC8 of SIRT6 towards poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase 1 (PARP1)
at S39 [37]. as a substrate and consequently promotes genome stabil-
In contrast to the effect of phosphorylation on Class I ity through DNA double-strand break repair [49]. Unlike
HDAC histone deacetylase activity, HDAC6 phosphoryla- SIRT1 and SIRT6, studies of SIRT2 have shown that its
tion impacts its tubulin deacetylase activity, which further phosphorylation affects its deacetylase activity towards
affects cellular functions dependent on intracellular traffick- substrates that are involved in functions other than DNA
ing. Phosphorylation of HDAC6 by epidermal growth factor damage-related processes. SIRT2 phosphorylation by Cyc-
receptor (EGFR) at Y570 was found to reduce its activity, lin-dependent kinase (Cdk) proteins inhibits its enzymatic
such that changes in the trafficking of endosomes led to the activity to promote functions such as mitotic entry and neu-
lysosomal degradation of EGFR [38, 39]. Downstream of ronal mobility [50, 51].
EGFR-mediated signaling, extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) phosphorylates HDAC6 at S1035, which
Influence of phosphorylation state on HDAC
increases its alpha-tubulin deacetylase activity and thereby
subcellular localization
promotes cell migration [40]. Phosphorylation of HDAC6
by glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3β) specifically
in hippocampal neurons also promotes its tubulin deacety- The regulation of Class IIa HDACs by phosphorylation and
lase activity, but the effect is a reduction in the movement consequent change in subcellular localization has been stud-
of mitochondria. According to what is known about the ied extensively. In response to a variety of cellular signaling
relationship between improper mitochondrial transport and processes, Class IIa HDACs can be phosphorylated at sites
neurodegenerative diseases, this pathway is suggested as a that regulate either their nuclear export or import, which
possible therapeutic target [41–43]. further influences their ability to regulate gene transcrip-
Phosphorylation also modulates the activity of sirtuins tion. The change in subcellular localization can depend on
in modifying a variety of substrates. In particular, phos- the interaction between Class IIa HDACs and 14-3-3 pro-
phorylation of SIRT1 influences its deacetylase activity to teins, chaperones that recognize specific phosphoserine- or
regulate DNA damage responses in different contexts and phosphothreonine-containing motifs [52, 53]. McKinsey
mechanisms. It has been noted that SIRT1 S152 phospho- et al. identified a nuclear export sequence in HDAC5 that is
rylation is reduced in aging mice. Mechanistically, SIRT1 conserved in HDAC4 and HDAC7 and is activated by Ca2+/
phosphorylation at this site is necessary for both its enzy- calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK)-mediated
matic activity and the expression of estrogen receptor beta phosphorylation in the 14-3-3 binding site of these HDACs
(ERβ), which are involved in reducing DNA damage in the [54]. Upon their interaction with 14-3-3 proteins, Class IIa
endothelium [44]. A study by Kang et al. found that SIRT1 HDACs undergo nuclear export, which is associated with
is phosphorylated by CK2 at four serine residues following reduced transcriptional repression due to the loss of their
ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage, which increases interaction with myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) tran-
its deacetylation rate and substrate-binding affinity. SIRT1 scription factors (Fig. 2).
modification in this context increases the deacetylation of Phosphorylation and consequent nuclear export of Class
p53 and thereby protects cells against apoptosis [45]. The IIa HDACs occurs through both signaling-dependent and
increased deacetylation of p53 following SIRT1 phospho- signaling-independent mechanisms to regulate gene expres-
rylation by the dual-specificity tyrosine-phosphorylated and sion in a cell type-specific manner. Several studies have
regulated kinases (DYRK) DYRK1A and DYRK3 has been demonstrated that some mechanisms can be extended to all
attributed to a modification-induced conformational change Class IIa HDACs. Through the activation of the tumor sup-
in SIRT1 that increases the turnover—defined as the dea- pressor liver kinase B1 (LKB1), the salt-inducible kinases
cetylation and release—of its substrates rather than changing (SIK) SIK2 and SIK3 phosphorylate the Class IIa HDACs
its catalytic ability [46]. In contrast, modification of SIRT1 in their 14-3-3 binding sites. Due to their subsequent nuclear
by homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) fol- export, these HDACs are unable to repress MEF2-depend-
lowing DNA damage and by AMP-activated protein kinase ent transcription as it pertains to myogenesis [55]. In their
(AMPK) in hepatocellular carcinoma cells reduces its dea- study of HDAC7 phosphorylation, Dequiedt et al. identi-
cetylase activity towards p53, leading to apoptosis [47, 48]. fied that Class IIa HDACs, by extension, are constitutively
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 431
Fig. 2 14-3-3-mediated nuclear export of phosphorylated Class IIa phorylation of Class IIa HDACs promotes their binding to 14-3-3
HDACs. One of the general mechanisms by which Class IIa HDACs proteins and nuclear export under a wide variety of stimuli and con-
are regulated is phosphorylation-dependent change in subcellular texts. As a consequence of their localization in the cytoplasm, Class
localization. Though the phosphorylation of Class IIa HDACs can IIa HDACs are unable to repress MEF2-mediated gene transcription
promote their nuclear import or export under specific stimuli and cel- [52–54]. P phosphate
lular contexts, many studies have presented the finding that the phos-
phosphorylated by the hPar-1/MARK (microtubule affinity- [59]. In cardiomyocytes, phosphorylation of HDAC5 by
regulating kinase) members EMK and C-TAK1, which pro- PKA, activated by cAMP signaling, prevents the binding
mote their binding to 14-3-3 proteins and nuclear export of HDAC5 with 14-3-3 proteins. As a result, HDAC5 is
[56]. Other studies have shown that the mechanism of regu- not exported from the nucleus and can perform in its role
lation is only applicable to a specific HDAC. For example, to transcriptionally repress cardiac fetal gene expression,
a study by McKinsey et al. led to the finding that 14-3-3 genes that are related to cardiomyocyte hypertrophy [60].
binding is constitutive for HDAC4 in yeast and mamma- Similarly, cAMP signaling and PKA activation in Schwann
lian cells. In contrast, the interaction between HDAC5 and cells results in HDAC4 phosphorylation, which induces
14-3-3 is dependent on CaMK signaling, as was simulated its nuclear localization. Through these series of events,
by the overexpression of constitutively active CaMKI in Cos HDAC4 is able to contribute to myelin sheath development
cells and 10T1/2 fibroblasts [57]. CaMKII activation under by repressing c-Jun expression. While this study was focused
the condition of genotoxic stress, when cellular reactive on HDAC4, this model of cAMP-mediated nuclear shuttling
oxygen species levels are increased, also leads to HDAC5 in Schwann cells is extended to all Class IIa HDACs [61].
phosphorylation and nuclear export, which has been associ- Cellular signaling can also lead to the dephosphoryla-
ated with p53-dependent apoptosis due to reduced p53 dea- tion and nuclear import of Class IIa HDACs. Interestingly,
cetylation [58]. whereas cAMP signaling has been associated with the inhi-
On the other hand, signaling-related mechanisms of bition of HDAC nuclear export through their phosphoryla-
phosphorylation can also promote the nuclear localization tion as described above, it has also been found to promote
of Class IIa HDACs. For example, HDAC5 phosphoryla- nuclear import through other mechanisms. In myoblasts,
tion within its nuclear localization sequence is needed for its cAMP signaling leads to nuclear import through the dephos-
nuclear import, where the loss of its phosphorylation (e.g., phorylation of HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC9 in their con-
S279A mutation) resulted in greater cytoplasmic localization served SP motif, referring to the serine phosphorylation site
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 32 S. Bahl, E. Seto
and the subsequent proline residue that respond to cAMP osteoblastic cells, Shimizu et al. identified that PKA act-
activation and change in localization. Notably, this mecha- ing downstream of parathyroid hormone signaling serves
nism is not extended to HDAC7 because it does not contain not only to phosphorylate HDAC4 at S740 to promote
the SP motif in its sequence, demonstrating how the Class its nuclear export, but also to stimulate PP2A-mediated
IIa HDACs can be differentially regulated [62]. Specific to dephosphorylation of HDAC4 at S355. Dephosphorylation
HDAC5, it was identified that β -adrenergic receptor acti- of HDAC4 at this site then leads to its partial lysosomal
1
vation and PKA activation in adult rat cardiomyocytes lead degradation [53].
to its dephosphorylation by serine/threonine-protein phos- Phosphorylation can also directly destabilize these pro-
phatase 2A (PP2A), promoting its nuclear accumulation and teins under other conditions. HDAC4, in particular, contains
repression of MEF2-dependent gene transcription [63]. This a PEST1 sequence, a region that is enriched in proline (P),
is interesting because, as noted above, PKA can also directly glutamic acid (E), serine (S), and threonine (T) residues,
phosphorylate HDAC5 to prevent its nuclear export in car- that can link its interaction with E3 ubiquitin ligases [70,
diomyocytes [60]. In another study, PP2A activity was also 71]. As demonstrated by the S298D mutation to mimic
found to dephosphorylate HDAC4 to promote its nuclear constitutive phosphorylation in this region, HDAC4 under-
import [64]. Thus, these studies demonstrate the complexity goes poly-ubiquitination and degradation [70]. A study by
of HDAC regulation by phosphorylation and highlight the Adenuga et al. found that exposing human bronchial epithe-
intricacies of the signaling pathways, cellular context, and lial and primary small airway epithelial cells, macrophages,
protein-specific attributes that may contribute to the conse- and mouse lungs to cigarette smoke extract led to HDAC2
quence of this modification. phosphorylation through a CK2-mediated mechanism, and
Although the regulation of subcellular localization by further to its ubiquitination and subsequent degradation.
phosphorylation has largely focused on Class IIa HDACs, This finding provides a rationale and strategy to reverse the
there has been some investigation into the regulation of loss of HDAC2 in lung inflammation-related diseases [29].
SIRT1 localization by phosphorylation. One study found The destabilization of several sirtuins by their phospho-
that SIRT1 phosphorylation by JNK1 under conditions rylation has particularly been described in the context of
of oxidative stress increased its nuclear localization and cellular stress and death. Tyrosine phosphorylation of SIRT2
affected its activity in a substrate-specific manner. Whereas by c-Src reduces its protein stability and expression, which
SIRT1 phosphorylation promoted its enzymatic activity is associated with increased p53 expression and apoptosis
towards histone H3, the acetylation of p53, a SIRT1 sub- [72]. SIRT6 phosphorylation by RAC-alpha serine/threo-
strate, was unaffected [65]. It is possible that the change nine-protein kinase (AKT1) leads to its ubiquitination by
in SIRT1 localization may regulate genes that protect cells the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase MDM2 and degradation. This
from apoptosis due to oxidative stress [65–67]. reduces the ability of SIRT6 to promote cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, thus supporting the proliferation of breast cancer
cells [73]. Another study found that upon energy starvation,
Role of phosphorylation in regulating HDAC
SIRT7 undergoes phosphorylation by AMPK, leading to a
stability
change in its localization from the nucleolus to the nucleo-
plasm and its ubiquitin-independent degradation through the
In several contexts, it has been demonstrated that HDAC REGγ proteasome. This mechanism reduces the energy-con-
phosphorylation can promote their stability through suming rDNA transcription mediated by SIRT7 to allow cell
diverse and protein-specific mechanisms (Fig. 3). In neu- survival under the imposed stress conditions [74].
rons, phosphorylation of HDAC2 at Y222 by tyrosine- For SIRT1, differential effects of kinase activities on its
protein kinase ABL1 (c-Abl) is important for maintaining stability demonstrate the importance of balance among the
HDAC2 protein expression. The loss of its phospho- regulatory mechanisms. SIRT1 phosphorylation at S46 by
rylation by site mutation or c-Abl inhibition resulted in JNK1 results in its proteasome-mediated degradation in
HDAC2 poly-ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, murine macrophage cells during the lipopolysaccharide-
thereby reducing the transcriptional repression of its target activated macrophages inflammatory response, as well as
synaptic and neuronal genes, such as Synaptotagmin and in obese mice [75, 76]. However, in this study, Gao et al.
GluR1 [68]. Similarly, SIRT1 phosphorylation by Ca2+/ found that both JNK1 inactivation and its persistent activa-
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase β (CaMKKβ) tion lead to SIRT1 degradation, where SIRT1 S46 phospho-
stimulated by pulsatile shear stress in vascular endothelial rylation first increases its enzymatic activity for a period of
cells was associated with an increase in its stability and time, after which it eventually undergoes ubiquitination and
activity, consequently promoting an anti-oxidative stress proteasomal degradation [76]. Conversely, JNK2 activity has
response and anti-inflammatory effects that are protec- been found to promote SIRT1 stability and was correlated
tive against atherosclerosis [69] In a study focusing on with SIRT1 phosphorylation at S27 in vitro [76, 77].
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 433
Fig. 3 Phosphorylation of HDAC2 influences its stability. Phospho- role in inflammation and steroid resistance associated with asthma
rylation of HDAC2 can have different effects on its stability depend- and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [29]. In neurons,
ing on the cellular context. HDAC2 phosphorylation by CK2 in lung loss of HDAC2 phosphorylation at Y222 leads to the proteasomal
epithelial cells, macrophages, and mouse lungs following exposure to degradation of HDAC2, releasing its repression of the transcription of
cigarette smoke leads to its ubiquitination and proteasomal degrada- neuronal genes that otherwise occurs in Alzheimer’s disease [68]. P
tion. Loss of HDAC2 through this mechanism is proposed to play a phosphate, Ub ubiquitin
Regulation of HDAC attributes during mitosis showed that modification in its nuclear locali-
by phosphorylation during mitosis zation sequence by Aurora kinase B (AurB) resulted in the
sequestration of HDAC5 in the spindle midzone, such that
Several studies have found that phosphorylation dynamics it was unable to interact with members of the N-CoR co-
can regulate HDAC interactions, functions, and localization repressor complex and to repress gene transcription. Though
during mitosis. One study demonstrated that HDAC2, but HDAC4 and HDAC9 can also be phosphorylated by this
not HDAC1, is hyperphosphorylated during mitosis follow- mitotic kinase, HDAC7 does not contain the AurB consensus
ing spindle checkpoint activation, where its hyperphospho- sequence [78].
rylation is associated with increased deacetylase activity SIRT1 and SIRT2 are also subject to regulation by phos-
[26]. Additionally, HDAC3 phosphorylation at Ser424 and phorylation during mitosis. SIRT1 phosphorylation dur-
interaction with linker histone subtype H1.3 in complex were ing mitosis suppresses centriole duplication. Specifically,
found to be higher under mitotic conditions. The associated to this end, its phosphorylation by the mitotic centrosomal
increase in HDAC3 activity towards histone H3K9 under kinase Aurora kinase A (AURKA) promotes its interaction
these circumstances has been suggested to influence a more with, and subsequent deacetylation and ubiquitin-dependent
compact mitotic chromatin conformation and polar micro- degradation of, the centrosome protein polo-like kinase 2
tubule dynamics [32]. A study of HDAC5 phosphorylation (Plk2). Thus, hypophosphorylation of SIRT1 during late G 1
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 34 S. Bahl, E. Seto
allows Plk2 accumulation and centriole duplication to be and metabolic disorders. Importantly, many HDAC phos-
initiated [79]. SIRT1 phosphorylation by Cyclin B/Cdk1 is phorylation sites have been identified in the context of cer-
also important for cells to enter the G phase in the cell cycle tain diseases, tissue types, and signaling mechanisms. Some
2
and thus regulates cell proliferation [80]. SIRT2 phospho- examples of HDAC phosphorylation in health and diseases
rylation, however, can either promote or inhibit its function are listed in Table 2. Phosphorylation of SIRT1 and its effect
in regulating cell proliferation depending on the kinase and on the tumor suppressor p53 under various contexts are illus-
phosphorylation site. One study proposed that the bind- trated in Fig. 4. These examples provide insight into possible
ing of group IVA cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA α) to avenues by which to specifically target HDAC activity and
2
SIRT2 results in Cdk2-mediated phosphorylation of SIRT2 function for therapeutic applications.
at S331. This modification promotes mitotic entry by reduc-
Cancer
ing SIRT2 activity, as detected towards acetylated histone
H4 peptide and acetylated histone H4K16, and its recruit-
ment to centrosomes and mitotic spindles [50]. In contrast, HDACs have been studied extensively in relation to cancer.
another study found that Cdk1-mediated phosphorylation of Several HDAC inhibitors have been approved by the United
SIRT2 at S368 during mitosis does not affect its deacetylase States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other drugs
activity, but instead supports its anti-proliferative function are under clinical investigation for the treatment of cancer
by delaying cell cycle progression in glioma cells [81]. It [82, 83]. According to the complexity of the tumor micro-
would be interesting to determine if this is a cell type-spe- environment and the activated signaling pathway(s), it is
cific mechanism or if it can be applied to other contexts. critical to consider whether the role of HDAC phosphoryla-
tion supports oncogenic or tumor suppressor functions. For
example, SIRT1 phosphorylation can have opposite effects
Physiological and disease relevance of HDAC
depending on the tumor type. In U2OS cells, AMPK-medi-
phosphorylation
ated phosphorylation of SIRT1 at T344 causes its dissocia-
tion from Deleted in Breast Cancer 1 (DBC1), its inhibitor,
Cellular signaling and phosphorylation events are involved to result in p53 deacetylation [84]. However, another group
in the maintenance of normal physiological processes, as found that SIRT1 phosphorylation at the same site by AMPK
well as the development of disease states. HDACs, as well, in liver cancer cells led to its inactivation, although the role
play a role in regulating a wide range of cellular processes of DBC1 was not evaluated in this study [48, 84]. The activ-
and have also been associated with diseases, such as cancer ity of different HDACs can also be involved in regulating
Table 2 Histone deacetylase (HDAC) phosphorylation in physiological processes and disease
Protein Process/disease References
HDAC1 Osteoblast differentiation, Diet-induced obesity, Hepatosteatosis [103, 120]
HDAC2 Cardiac hypertrophy, Diet-induced obesity, Hepatosteatosis, Neurodegenerative dis- [28, 29, 68, 110, 120, 130]
eases, Alzheimer’s disease, COPD-related inflammation
HDAC3 HER2-positive breast cancer, Parkinson’s disease, Glycolysis [33, 34, 112]
HDAC4 Glioblastoma, Skeletal myogenesis, Muscle cell differentiation, Cardiac hypertrophy, [61, 85, 86, 97, 104, 105, 113]
Gluconeogenesis, Myelin sheath development
HDAC5 Glioblastoma, Immune signaling, Skeletal myogenesis, Muscle cell differentiation, [57, 60, 85, 86, 98, 99, 104, 107, 108,
Angiogenesis, Cardiac hypertrophy, Gluconeogenesis, Insulin resistance (Type II 113, 114, 127, 128, 158]
diabetes, obesity), Neuronal differentiation, Synaptic plasticity, Depression, Cocaine-
reward behavior
HDAC6 Neurodegenerative diseases, Mitochondrial transport [41, 129]
HDAC7 Glioblastoma, Immune signaling, Muscle cell differentiation, Angiogenesis, Gluco- [85, 86, 101, 102, 113]
neogenesis
HDAC9/MITR Glioblastoma, Muscle cell differentiation [85, 86, 99]
SIRT1 Liver cancer, Osteosarcoma, Diet-induced obesity, NAFLD, Lipid homeostasis, Hepa- [44, 48, 69, 84, 89, 118, 121, 122, 126]
tosteatosis, Atherosclerosis, DNA damage response
SIRT2 Microglial inflammation, Listeria monocytogenes infection [95, 96]
SIRT3 Colon carcinoma, Triple-negative breast cancer, Glioblastoma [87]
SIRT6 HER2-positive breast cancer [73]
SIRT7 Cardiac fibrosis [111]
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 435
Fig. 4 Relationship between SIRT1 phosphorylation and p53-medi- phorylation of SIRT1 at different sites by several kinases, including
ated apoptosis. a Phosphorylation of SIRT1 at T344 by AMPK can CK2, DYRK1A, DYRK3, and HIPK2, which influences the ability of
have opposing effects on p53 acetylation, depending on the cellular SIRT1 to deacetylate p53. CK2- and DYRK-mediated phosphoryla-
context. SIRT1 phosphorylation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells tion of SIRT1 support its ability to deacetylate p53 and inhibit apop-
inhibits its activity in deacetylating p53 and promotes apoptosis [48]. tosis [45, 46]. In contrast, SIRT1 phosphorylation by HIPK2 disrupts
In contrast, its phosphorylation in osteosarcoma cells disrupts its its interaction with its activator, AROS, which inhibits the deacetyla-
interaction with its inhibitor, DBC1, allowing SIRT1 to deacetylate tion of p53 and leads to apoptosis [47]. P phosphate, Ac acetyl group
p53 and inhibit apoptosis [84]. b Genotoxic stress leads to the phos-
the same tumor type. In HER2-positive breast cancer cells, acetylation was increased as a consequence of HDAC inac-
HDAC3 phosphorylation by c-Src increased its activity to tivation, resulting in an inability to inhibit mTORC2. In par-
promote cell proliferation, suggesting that this mechanism ticular, Rictor acetylation in this process is connected with
may potentially serve as a target in treatments for this breast resistance to therapies that target EGFR, phosphoinositide
cancer subtype [34]. SIRT6 promotes cell growth in HER2- 3-kinase (PI3K), and AKT [86].
positive breast cancer through another mechanism, by which Other drug resistance mechanisms related with phos-
it contributes to trastuzumab resistance. Specifically, SIRT6 phorylation status can be extended across tumor types. One
phosphorylation by AKT1, interaction with the E3 ubiquitin study identified that radiation induces the co-localization
ligase MDM2, and subsequent degradation reduces its inhi- of Cyclin B1-Cdk1 and SIRT3 at the mitochondria. Cdk1-
bition of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis [73]. mediated phosphorylation of SIRT3 at T150 and S159 pro-
Phosphorylation of Class IIa HDACs has been associ- motes the deacetylation of mitochondrial proteins, as was
ated with resistance to glioblastoma (GBM) therapies. It was tested in HCT116 colon carcinoma, MDA-MB-231 triple-
initially found that mTOR Complex 2 (mTORC2) activa- negative breast cancer, and U87 glioblastoma cell lines.
tion in EGFRvIII mutant GBM leads to the phosphoryla- SIRT3 phosphorylation is important for mitochondrial func-
tion and subsequent inactivation of Class IIa HDACs, fol- tions, such as ATP production and maintenance of the mito-
lowed by higher acetylation of the forkhead box proteins chondrial membrane potential, and tumor adaptive resistance
FoxO1 and FoxO3, as well as Myc proto-oncogene protein to radiation therapy [87]. Another mechanism of resistance
(c-Myc) upregulation. The phosphorylation of Class IIa is through interleukin 6 (IL-6)-mediated protection of can-
HDACs therefore has therapeutic relevance because acti- cer cells from chemotherapy drug-induced apoptosis [88,
vated mTORC2 signaling, acetylated FoxO proteins, and 89] This is detrimental, considering that the downstream
higher c-Myc levels are all associated with metabolic repro- Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription
gramming and poor prognosis in glioblastoma patients [85]. 3 (JAK-STAT3) pathway is activated in many tumor types,
Further study indicated that the auto-activation of mTORC2 including lung adenocarcinoma and breast cancers [89, 90].
and inactivating phosphorylation of Class IIa HDACs in However, SIRT1 phosphorylation by JAK1 downstream of
EGFRvIII mutant GBM occur when nutrients, including IL-6 stimulation serves as a negative feedback mechanism
glucose and acetate, are present at higher levels. Rictor that targets STAT3 transcriptional activity and IL-6 activity
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 36 S. Bahl, E. Seto
to overcome the resistance to chemotherapy. In this way, chromatin, deacetylation of H3K18, and transcriptional
SIRT1 phosphorylation can oppose IL-6-induced cancer cell repression to support infection-related outcomes [96].
survival [89]. Thus, a better understanding of the mecha-
Differentiation and development
nisms that regulate specific HDACs in different tumor types
can aid in the development of new therapeutic strategies
and improve the design of current approaches to overcome Class IIa HDACs are involved in differentiation and develop-
drug resistance. ment processes due to their regulation of MEF2-mediated
transcription in a variety of contexts. Phosphorylation, in
Infection and immune response
particular, has been important for their function in these pro-
cesses. As described above, phosphorylation of Class IIa
Several cases of HDAC phosphorylation in relation to the HDACs can regulate their subcellular localization, which
immune system have been described. One study found thereby influences their interaction with MEF transcription
that B cell antigen receptor (BCR) activation in B lym- factors to regulate gene expression. A study by Liu et al.
phocytes leads to protein kinase D (PKD) enzymes-medi- suggested crosstalk between the beta-adrenergic signaling
ated phosphorylation of HDAC5 and HDAC7, followed pathway and muscle activity-dependent pathway in skel-
by their nuclear export and reduced impact on transcrip- etal muscle fibers. In this study, HDAC4 phosphorylation
tional repression, as was demonstrated by nuclear recep- at S265 and S266 by PKA following beta-adrenergic acti-
tor Nur77 reporter activation [91]. In thymocytes, T cell vation led to its nuclear influx and suppression of MEF2-
receptor (TCR) activation leads to HDAC7 phosphorylation mediated transcription of skeletal muscle genes, whereas
by PKD1 through a calcium-independent mechanism. As its phosphorylation at S246, S267, and S232 by CaMKII
a consequence, HDAC7 undergoes nuclear export, lead- following muscle fiber activity led to its nuclear efflux to
ing to the transcriptional activation of Nur77. This series have the opposite effect on transcription [97]. HDAC4 and
of events causes thymocytes to undergo apoptosis [92–94]. HDAC5 phosphorylation downstream of CaMK signaling
In cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), however, HDAC7 has leads to their nuclear export, allowing MEF2 to interact
also been found to be constitutively phosphorylated and with myoblast determination protein 1 (MyoD) and activate
bound to 14-3-3 proteins through a mechanism that does not gene transcription for the muscle differentiation program for
require TCR stimulation. Under these conditions, HDAC7 skeletal myogenesis [57, 98]. In myoblasts, phosphorylation
is localized in the cytoplasm and is unable to repress the of the nuclear localization sequence of Class IIa HDACs,
transcription of cytokines and their receptors, as well as as demonstrated in HDAC5 and the HDAC9 splice variant
adhesion molecules. A demonstrated consequence of the MITR, by Mirk in myoblasts reduces their nuclear accumu-
loss of HDAC7 phosphorylation in CTLs was the repression lation and inhibition of MEF2C transcription factor, which
of cytokine receptor CD25 expression and the consequent allows myogenin transcription to promote muscle cell dif-
loss of effector cytokine interferon-gamma (IFNγ) produc- ferentiation. Importantly, muscle cell differentiation is rel-
tion. Importantly, it was indicated that although HDAC7 evant to the therapeutic regeneration of damaged skeletal or
phosphorylation is not a response to TCR activation, it still cardiac muscle [99].
plays a role in mediating the effector response, as IFNγ was Angiogenesis is a process that is involved in vascular
not produced upon TCR activation in CTLs expressing the development. In endothelial cells, signaling downstream
HDAC7 phosphorylation-inactive mutant [94]. In total- of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) stimulation
ity, these findings demonstrate how a deacetylase enzyme, can lead to Class IIa HDAC phosphorylation, consequently
namely HDAC7, can be regulated by different mechanisms influencing MEF2-mediated transcription of genes involved
among various cell types to produce specific effects. in angiogenesis. In this context, HDAC5 phosphorylation
SIRT2 phosphorylation also plays several roles in infec- at S259 and S498 by PKD resulted in its nuclear export
tion and immune response. One study found that the loss and activated transcription of MEF2-target genes related to
of SIRT2 phosphorylation at S331, as was mimicked by endothelial cell migration and tube formation, processes that
mutation of the site to alanine, resulted in an increase in its are representative of angiogenesis [100]. Similarly, down-
deacetylase activity towards NFκB and consequent reduc- stream of VEGF stimulation, HDAC7 phosphorylation at
tion in pro-inflammatory gene transcription in microglia. S178, S344, and S479, was mediated by PKD1. HDAC7
Accordingly, SIRT2 phosphorylation has been suggested as cytoplasmic localization under this circumstance was asso-
a target for microglial neurotoxicity and associated inflam- ciated with the transcriptional activation of the matrix
mation [95]. A role for the phosphorylation status of SIRT2 metalloproteinases MMP10 and MT1-MMP, which sup-
was additionally identified in the context of Listeria mono- port endothelial cell migration and tube formation [101].
cytogenes infection. Specifically, SIRT2 dephosphorylation Another study additionally identified that HDAC7 phos-
at S25 following infection promotes its association with phorylation reduces its repression of angiogenesis-related
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 437
genes, including Nur77 and RCAN2, accordingly promoting is suggested to influence changes in gene transcription
proliferation and migration [102]. through ERK and Mothers against decapentaplegic homolog
Unlike the cases described above, HDAC1 phosphoryla- 2 (Smad2) phosphorylation and activation. The changes in
tion has been suggested to play a role in osteoblast differ- gene expression promote the differentiation of cardiac fibro-
entiation. Gemini-Piperni et al. performed a study to better blasts to myofibroblasts, thereby supporting the development
understand the mechanisms involved in osteoblast adhesion, of cardiac fibrosis [111].
as is relevant to the clinical application of hydroxyapatite
(HA) scaffolds for bone tissue regeneration. HDAC1 phos-
Metabolic processes
phorylation at S421 by cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5)
was found to be associated with osteoblast differentiation.
Further, HDAC1 phosphorylation levels were higher in cells HDAC phosphorylation has also been studied in the context
that were adhering to HA surfaces, as opposed to the tissue of metabolic processes and diseases. For example, HDAC3
culture plate, a difference that was attributed to osteoblast S424 is phosphorylated through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
differentiation [103]. pathway downstream of insulin stimulation, which pro-
motes the deacetylation and activation of phosphoglycerate
Cardiac hypertrophy
kinase 1 (PGK1) to produce ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate
(3-PG) during glycolysis. HDAC3 modification is therefore
Class IIa HDAC regulation of MEF2-mediated transcrip- suggested as a relevant target for diseases involving PGK1
tion extends to the development of cardiac hypertrophy. dysfunction, such as hemolytic anemia [112]. A study by
Hypertrophic stimuli and their downstream signaling pro- Mihaylova et al. showed that treatment of hepatocytes with
cesses have been found to regulate the phosphorylation of the fasting hormone glucagon leads to the dephosphoryla-
HDAC4 and HDAC5 to influence their role in the fetal gene tion of HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7, which promotes their
response, which is the reprogramming of gene expression nuclear localization, deacetylation of FOXO, and subsequent
in cardiomyocytes to allow the consequent hypertrophic activation of the FOXO family of transcription factors at the
phenotype [104]. Phosphorylation of HDAC4, but not other promoters of genes involved in gluconeogenesis. Given that
Class IIa HDACs, by the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent pro- the suppression of Class IIa HDACs was shown to improve
tein kinase II form CaMKIIδB and of HDAC5 by PKD in hyperglycemia in mouse models of type 2 diabetes, it is
cardiomyocytes reduces their repression of MEF2-mediated suggested that the phosphorylation, and subsequent nuclear
fetal cardiac gene expression, thereby contributing to the export, of Class IIa HDACs may be a mechanism by which
development of cardiac hypertrophy [104–106]. However, to target metabolic syndrome [113].
the different pathways leading to HDAC5 phosphorylation Many studies have specifically focused on the role of
in cardiomyocytes must be balanced to appropriately regu- HDAC phosphorylation in obesity and fatty liver. It was
late hypertrophy-related gene expression. Specifically, PKA found that HDAC5 phosphorylation by AMPK in skeletal
activation downstream of acute beta-adrenergic signaling muscle is associated with its nuclear export, thereby reduc-
is associated with HDAC5 phosphorylation at S279 and its ing the transcriptional repression of glucose transporter
nuclear accumulation, in opposition to its nuclear export and type 4 (GLUT4) [114]. Given that higher GLUT4 expres-
transcriptional activation due to its phosphorylation at S259 sion is involved in overcoming insulin resistance related to
and S498 by CaMKII and PKD downstream of G-protein obesity and type 2 diabetes, a therapeutic strategy in this
coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling [107]. Notably, HDAC5 context would be to promote HDAC5 phosphorylation in
was also identified to be phosphorylated at S259 by protein skeletal muscle [114–117]. SIRT1 phosphorylation has
kinase Cδ (PKCδ), a kinase that plays a role in myocardial also been shown to have a protective effect against diet-
hypertrophy and heart failure [108, 109]. induced obesity, as its consequent increased activity leads
Hypertrophic stimuli-mediated signaling can also induce to the transcriptional activation of genes that promote higher
the phosphorylation of other HDACs to promote the devel- thermogenic function and fatty acid oxidation. Therefore,
opment of cardiac hypertrophy. Through immunohistochem- another proposed therapeutic strategy is to promote SIRT1
istry and immunoblot methods, HDAC2 phosphorylation at phosphorylation at S434 downstream of beta-adrenergic
S394 was detected to be higher in the heart tissue of patients signaling and the cAMP pathway in skeletal muscle and
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy relative to normal heart brown adipose tissue. [118, 119]. Additionally, HDAC1
tissue. HDAC2 phosphorylation by CK2 occurring down- and HDAC2 phosphorylation is also protective against diet-
stream of hypertrophic stimuli leads to its increased enzy- induced obesity, though through a different mechanism.
matic activity towards genes that promote disease develop- Since dephosphorylation of HDAC1 S393 and HDAC2 S394
ment [110]. In cardiofibroblasts, angiotensin-II stimulation by mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3)
leads to an increase in the phosphorylation of SIRT7, which reduces their ability to repress lipogenic gene expression in
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 38 S. Bahl, E. Seto
the liver, regulation of MKP-3 activity presents a therapeutic leads to the activation of the CaMKII and PKD-dependent
target to oppose the development of hepatosteatosis [120]. pathway and phosphorylation of HDAC5 at S259 and S498.
Interestingly, SIRT1 can have differing effects on hepa- MEF2 transcriptional activity is increased due to the nuclear
tosteatosis and fatty liver, depending on the context under export of HDAC5, presenting the possibility that HDAC5
which it is phosphorylated. CK2 expression and SIRT1 S164 phosphorylation induces anti-depressive effects. The phos-
phosphorylation levels were found to be higher in liver sam- phorylation of HDAC5 may therefore be relevant to the
ples of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) patients mechanism of action of ketamine [128].
and were indicative of severity [121]. Under glucose starva- In the context of neurodegenerative diseases, it was iden-
tion conditions, AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of SIRT1 tified in the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line that HDAC6
at T530 reduces its degradation by the REGγ proteasome phosphorylation by CK2 resulted in its increased cytoplas-
and allows its deacetylation of the autophagy proteins Atg5 mic deacetylase activity, preventing protein aggregate accu-
and Atg7 to promote autophagy [122]. This balance between mulation and associated cellular stress that would otherwise
SIRT1 proteasomal degradation and autophagy is involved lead to cytotoxicity [129]. In contrast, it has been proposed
in regulating lipid homeostasis, further influencing attributes that HDAC6 may be phosphorylated by GSK3β, and that its
of metabolic disorders, where the consequence of SIRT1 increased tubulin deacetylase activity in hippocampal neu-
phosphorylation is protective against steatosis and fatty liver rons could lead to issues in mitochondrial transport. Thus,
[122–125]. Furthermore, Lu et al. generated mouse models Chen et al. proposed that this mechanism may serve as a
that expressed knock-in T522A loss of phosphorylation and therapeutic target for neurodegenerative disorders in which
T522E (threonine to glutamic acid) phosphomimic muta- proper mitochondrial transport is affected [41]. HDAC2
tions to show that the effect of SIRT1 T522 phosphorylation phosphorylation has also been suggested as a therapeutic
is tissue-dependent and must therefore be tightly regulated. target for neurodegenerative diseases. HDAC2 phospho-
Whereas T522 phosphorylation is necessary for systemic rylation at S394 was reduced under oxidative stress con-
energy homeostasis, its dephosphorylation is needed for adi- ditions, as demonstrated by cerebral ischemia in mice and
pogenesis. Although constitutive phosphorylation of SIRT1 hydrogen peroxide ( H O ) treatment of HT-22 hippocampal
2 2
was related with an improvement in high-fat diet-induced neurons. As a consequence of its loss of phosphorylation,
dyslipidemia, loss of phosphorylation was associated with HDAC2 was unable to interact with the transcription factor
the development of hepatic steatosis under high-fat diet FOXO3a, leading to an increase in the expression of the
conditions because the expression of genes that promote cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, which has a protec-
hepatic fatty acid oxidation was lower [126]. These cases tive effect against apoptosis under stress conditions [130].
demonstrate how HDAC phosphorylation occurs in a variety Additionally, HDAC2 phosphorylation at Y222 by c-Abl
of contexts to influence different outcomes. In the design is induced by Aβ oligomer damage in neurons, which pro-
of therapeutic approaches for metabolic disorders, it will motes HDAC2-mediated repression of neuronal gene expres-
be necessary to consider the intricacies of each pathway sion in Alzheimer’s disease [68]. HDAC3 phosphorylation
involved and the specific phosphorylation site that must be contributes to cellular stress in the context of Parkinson’s
targeted without producing a harmful effect through another disease. 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) treatment of neu-
pathway. rons to model Parkinson’s disease conditions resulted in
HDAC3 phosphorylation at S424 by LRRK2, which pro-
Neurological disorders
moted HDAC3 activity. Consequences of HDAC3 modifica-
tion included inhibition of MEF2D transcriptional activity,
Phosphorylation of HDACs also influences their roles in deacetylation of histone H4K12, and cytotoxicity [33]. Thus,
neurological development and disorders. HDAC4 phospho- HDACs produce different effects related to neurodevelop-
rylation downstream of cAMP signaling and PKA activa- ment and neurodegeneration, which can be targeted through
tion in Schwann cells leads to its nuclear localization and their phosphorylation.
consequent repression of c-Jun to promote myelin sheath
development [61]. Another study identified HDAC5 phos-
Looking to the future
phorylation by SIK1 as a consequence of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signaling in cortical neurons.
HDAC5 subsequently undergoes nuclear export, leading to As has been demonstrated and described above, phospho-
an increase in MEF2 transcriptional activity. It is suggested rylation can influence many different aspects of HDAC
that the transcriptional changes in this pathway are relevant enzymes, including enzymatic activities, protein–protein
to processes regulating neuronal differentiation and synap- interactions, protein localization, and protein stability, to
tic plasticity [127]. In hippocampal neurons, stimulation by affect physiological functions. Here, we have separated
ketamine, which is associated with antidepressant effects, the effects of phosphorylation on protein regulation into
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 439
different categories, such as activity and subcellular local- and Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) Phospho-
ization, but in many cases, these effects are not mutually Motif Finder, offer predictions for phosphorylation sites and
exclusive and can influence one another. Accordingly, it is possible kinases or phosphatases based on sequence motifs
important to consider that phosphorylation can coordinate [137–142]. These resources present a starting point for stud-
with other PTMs through crosstalk, such as ubiquitination, ies of protein phosphorylation to understand what is known
acetylation, and phosphorylation at other sites within the and yet unknown. We anticipate that these resources will
same protein, to regulate its characteristics and functions help uncover many more instances of HDAC phosphoryla-
[28–30, 70]. Another manner of the temporal regulation of tion, as well as point to their biological consequences.
a protein is through its modification by different PTMs at the There are many HDAC phosphorylation sites that have
same residue under separate contexts [2]. These factors add yet to be identified or validated. Though a protein may be
layers of complexity to the identified mechanisms. phosphorylated at a certain site, this modification may elude
Although a few mechanisms of the effects of HDAC detection if it occurs at low abundance or only transiently
phosphorylation have been well-characterized, there are under specific conditions [4, 30]. Of note, the phosphoryla-
still many unknowns regarding intricacies in the cellular and tion of HDAC10, HDAC11, SIRT4, and SIRT5 has not been
molecular contexts. It is clear that while some sites within extensively characterized, although several putative modi-
HDACs may be constitutively phosphorylated, many phos- fied residues have been detected in mass spectrometry analy-
phorylation events occur as a response to a cellular stimulus. ses (Table 3). Interestingly, HDAC10 Ser368 phosphoryla-
It would be valuable to determine whether identified mecha- tion has been identified in several high-throughput analyses
nisms could be extended to other cell lines and conditions of cancer tissue and cell lines, including breast cancer and
that actively undergo the same signaling processes. Though leukemia [131, 143–146]. HDAC11 threonine phosphoryla-
this has been explored to some extent, many studies focus tion has been identified under the condition of ventricular
on one protein within a given cellular context, which in itself tachycardia, and SIRT5 phosphorylation was predicted in
could provide useful information regarding specificity. Addi- acute myelogenous leukemia and lung cancer [131, 147].
tionally, numerous discoveries of HDAC phosphorylation Characterization of these predicted phosphorylation sites
sites have been made in certain cell lines under specific treat- would provide some insight into the mechanisms by which
ment conditions to mimic normal physiological processes or these proteins are regulated, as well as their possible physi-
disease states. Elucidating the underlying conditions lead- ological relevance.
ing to HDAC phosphorylation, the downstream mechanism, An additional point to be noted is that many charac-
and further, the biological outcome, is therefore particularly terized HDAC phosphorylation mechanisms involve the
critical for the development of effective and specific targeted modification of serine and threonine residues, but fewer
therapies that could target this modification. cases of tyrosine phosphorylation have been described.
A variety of tools and databases have helped to organize This difference can be attributed to the cellular or dis-
high-throughput PTM data in a comprehensive manner that ease conditions under which the phosphorylation sites
is easily accessible to the public. Databases such as Phos- were detected and the transient nature of tyrosine phos-
phoSitePlus, Phospho.ELM, and Phosida provide an exten- phorylation [148]. Importantly, tyrosine phosphorylation
sive range of information about predicted or validated sites, has been taken into consideration and incorporated into
including their evolutionary conservation and the conditions the design of targeted therapeutic approaches due to its
under which they were detected [131–136]. Other databases, roles in growth factor-mediated signaling and regulation
such as NetPhos 3.1, GPS (Group-based Prediction System), of cellular processes leading to disease development and
Table 3 Putative
Protein Site Cellular context References
phosphorylation sites on histone
deacetylases (HDACs) that HDAC10 S368 Breast cancer, T-cell leukemia cells, Mitotic cells [131, 143–146]
require further characterization
S373 Mitotic cells [144]
S393 Liver tissue [163]
S540 T-cell leukemia cells [131]
HDAC11 T5, T76 Heart tissue, Ventricular tachycardia [131]
Y199 Mantle cell lymphoma cells [164]
SIRT4 S255, S261, S262 HeLa cells [165]
SIRT5 Y76 Bone marrow tissue, Acute myelogenous leukemia [131]
T87 Lung cancer cells [166]
S160 Lung cancer cells [147]
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 40 S. Bahl, E. Seto
progression [2, 3, 148]. The clinical relevance of tyrosine Concluding remarks
phosphorylation is supported by the many tyrosine kinase
inhibitors that have been approved as treatment options, HDACs regulate a variety of cellular processes, in addition
such as for cancer, in which aberrant tyrosine phospho- to gene transcription, in different tissue types, thereby influ-
rylation has been associated with cellular transformation encing normal physiological functions and disease develop-
and proliferation [148–151]. Therefore, although tyros- ment. Therefore, it is critical to define the mechanisms that
ine phosphorylation may be more difficult to detect, it is regulate these enzymes and to identify the functional con-
a promising, yet largely unexplored, avenue of research sequences associated with their dysregulation, particularly
regarding HDAC regulation and relationship with diseases. in the larger context of disease states. As has been discussed
Additional challenges in the study of protein phos- here, the modification of HDACs by phosphorylation can
phorylation arise as a result of the extensive variation in affect its protein characteristics and functions in different
the effect of phosphorylation on the HDACs due to the ways. Many class-wide, as well as protein-specific, mecha-
complexity added by a multitude of factors, including the nisms of phosphorylation have been described, but ample
location of the modified site within the protein, such as remain to be identified and validated. Further characteriza-
the catalytic domain or nuclear localization sequence, and tion of the intricacies regarding the regulation of HDACs
crosstalk between other PTMs. However, discrepancies in by phosphorylation will be clinically relevant, as a better
the conclusions made from experiments evaluating the understanding of the underlying mechanisms will support
effect of phosphorylation of the same site(s) within the the design of therapeutic strategies to selectively inhibit or
same protein can also arise from differences between the activate any HDAC in a given physiological state.
methodologies used. As discussed above, HDAC1 phos-
phorylation at S421 and S423 was found to have different Acknowledgements We thank members of the Seto Lab for support
effects depending on whether core histones or the histone and discussions. Additionally, we thank our past and present colleagues
for discussions and insights on HDACs. We apologize to those whose
H4 peptide was used as the substrate to assess changes in
work was not cited in this paper due to space constraints. Funding
deacetylase activity [24–26]. for this work was awarded to ES by the National Institutes of Health
Further, it has been suggested that the results can vary (R01CA187040, R01CA169210).
depending on the approach used to induce or simulate a
change in the phosphorylation state. Ideally, a study will Author contributions Both SB and ES conceived the idea for the
article. The majority of the literature search and data analysis were
employ 1) a genetic approach to generate mutants that
performed by SB. SB wrote the first draft of the manuscript and ES
mimic constitutive phosphorylation or loss of phospho- critically revised the work.
rylation at the site and 2) a chemical approach through
treating cells with activators or inhibitors of kinases or Compliance with ethical standards
phosphatases. One such case that demonstrates the dif-
ferences in results associated with genetic and chemical Conflict of interest All authors declare that there are no conflict of in-
approaches is an evaluation of the phosphorylation state terest.
of HDAC1. In their study, Pflum et al. suggested that S421
and S423 may be constitutively phosphorylated because
they are buried sites within the structure of HDAC1 and
References
may thus be inaccessible to phosphatases [24]. In con-
trast, though, Galasinski et al. identified in their study that
1. Seto E, Yoshida M (2014) Erasers of histone acetylation: the
HDAC1 is basally phosphorylated, but that it can still be
histone deacetylase enzymes. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
hyperphosphorylated upon treatment with the phosphatase 6:a018713. https: //doi.org/10.1101/cshper spect .a01871 3
inhibitor okadaic acid [26]. Also in contrast to the study 2. Deribe Y, Pawson T, Dikic I (2010) Post-translational modifica-
by Pflum et al., Galasinski et al. found that hyperphos- tions in signal integration. Nat Struct Mol Biol 17:666–672. https
://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1842
phorylation of HDAC1 through phosphatase inhibition in
3. Spickett CM, Pitt AR, Morrice N, Kolch W (2006) Proteomic
fact interfered with the ability of HDAC1 to interact with analysis of phosphorylation, oxidation and nitrosylation in signal
HDAC2, mSin3A, and YY1 [24, 26]. A possible explana- transduction. Biochim Biophys Acta 1764:1823–1841. https: //
tion for this discrepancy may be in the methods employed doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap .2006.09.013
4. Venne AS, Kollipara L, Zahedi RP (2014) The next level of com-
in these studies, whereas Pflum et al. tested the effect of
plexity: crosstalk of posttranslational modifications. Proteomics
the loss of site-specific phosphorylation through mutations 14:513–524. https: //doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201300 344
of S421 and S423 to alanine, Galasinski et al. evaluated 5. Cao J, Sun L, Aramsangtienchai P et al (2019) HDAC11 reg-
the general phosphorylation of HDAC1 through treatment ulates type I interferon signaling through defatty-acylation of
SHMT2. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116:5487–5492. https: //doi.
with the phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid [24, 26].
org/10.1073/pnas.181536 5116
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 441
6. Roessler C, Nowak T, Pannek M et al (2014) Chemical probing 25. Cai R, Kwon P, Yan-Neale Y et al (2001) Mammalian histone
of the human sirtuin 5 active site reveals its substrate acyl speci- deacetylase 1 protein is posttranslationally modified by phospho-
ficity and peptide-based inhibitors. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl rylation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 283:445–453. https: //
53:10728–10732. https: //doi.org/10.1002/anie.201402 679 doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.4786
7. Tan M, Peng C, Anderson KA et al (2014) Lysine glutarylation is 26. Galasinski SC, Resing KA, Goodrich JA, Ahn NG (2002) Phos-
a protein posttranslational modification regulated by SIRT5. Cell phatase inhibition leads to histone deacetylases 1 and 2 phospho-
Metab 19:605–617. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2014.03.014 rylation and disruption of corepressor interactions. J Biol Chem
8. Carafa V, Nebbioso A, Altucci L (2012) Sirtuins and disease: the 277:19618–19626. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M20117 4200
road ahead. Front Pharmacol 3:4. https: //doi.org/10.3389/fphar 27. Tsai S-C, Seto E (2002) Regulation of histone deacetylase 2 by
.2012.00004 protein kinase CK2. J Biol Chem 277:31826–31833. https: //doi.
9. Carafa V, Rotili D, Forgione M et al (2016) Sirtuin functions and org/10.1074/jbc.M20414 9200
modulation: from chemistry to the clinic. Clin Epigenet 8:61. 28. Adenuga D, Rahman I (2010) Protein kinase CK2-mediated
https: //doi.org/10.1186/s13148 -016-0224-3 phosphorylation of HDAC2 regulates co-repressor formation,
10. Dai H, Sinclair DA, Ellis JL, Steegborn C (2018) Sirtuin acti- deacetylase activity and acetylation of HDAC2 by cigarette
vators and inhibitors: promises, achievements, and challenges. smoke and aldehydes. Arch Biochem Biophys 498:62–73. https
Pharmacol Ther 188:140–154. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.pharm ://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2010.04.002
thera. 2018.03.004 29. Adenuga D, Yao H, March TH, Seagrave J, Rahman I (2009)
11. Du J, Jiang H, Lin H (2009) Investigating the ADP-ribosyltrans- Histone deacetylase 2 is phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and
ferase activity of sirtuins with NAD analogues and 32P-NAD. degraded by cigarette smoke. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 40:464–
Biochemistry 48:2878–2890. https: //doi.org/10.1021/bi8020 93g 473. https: //doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2008-0255OC
12. Du J, Zhou Y, Su X et al (2011) Sirt5 is a NAD-dependent pro- 30. Segré CV, Chiocca S (2011) Regulating the regulators: the post-
tein lysine demalonylase and desuccinylase. Science 334:806– translational code of class I HDAC1 and HDAC2. J Biomed Bio-
809. https: //doi.org/10.1126/scienc e.120786 1 technol 2011:690848. https: //doi.org/10.1155/2011/690848
13. Feldman J, Dittenhafer-Reed K, Denu J (2012) Sirtuin cataly- 31. Zhang X, Ozawa Y, Lee H et al (2005) Histone deacetylase 3
sis and regulation. J Biol Chem 287:42419–42427. https: //doi. (HDAC3) activity is regulated by interaction with protein ser-
org/10.1074/jbc.R112.378877 ine/threonine phosphatase 4. Genes Dev 19:827–839. https: //doi.
14. Mathias R, Greco TM, Oberstein A et al (2014) Sirtuin 4 is a org/10.1101/gad.128600 5
lipoamidase regulating pyruvate dehydrogenase complex activity. 32. Patil H, Wilks C, Gonzaelez RW et al (2016) Mitotic activation
Cell 159:1615–1625. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.046 of a novel histone deacetylase 3-linker histone H1.3 protein com-
15. Reichert N, Choukrallah M-A, Matthias P (2012) Multiple roles plex by protein kinase CK2. J Biol Chem 291:3158–3172. https
of class I HDACs in proliferation, differentiation, and develop- ://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.643874
ment. Cell Mol Life Sci 69:2173–2187. https: //doi.org/10.1007/ 33. Han KA, Shin WH, Jung S et al (2017) Leucine-rich repeat
s00018 -012-0921-9 kinase 2 exacerbates neuronal cytotoxicity through phosphoryla-
16. Hunter T, Cooper J (1985) Protein-tyrosine kinases. Annu tion of histone deacetylase 3 and histone deacetylation. Hum Mol
Rev Biochem 54:897–930. https: //doi.org/10.1146/annur Genet 26:1–18. https: //doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw363
ev.bi.54.070185 .004341 34. Seo J, Guk G, Park S-H et al (2019) Tyrosine phosphorylation of
17. Jin J, Pawson T (2012) Modular evolution of phosphorylation- HDAC3 by Src kinase mediates proliferation of HER2-positive
based signalling systems. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci breast cancer cells. J Cell Physiol 234:6428–6436. https: //doi.
367:2540–2555. https: //doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0106 org/10.1002/jcp.27378
18. van der Laarse SAM, Leney AC, Heck AJR (2018) Crosstalk 35. Lee H, Rezai-zadeh N, Seto E (2004) Negative regulation of
between phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation: friend or foe. histone deacetylase 8 activity by cyclic AMP-dependent protein
FEBS J 285:3152–3167. https: //doi.org/10.1111/febs.14491 kinase A. Mol Cell Biol 24:765–773. https: //doi.org/10.1128/
19. Narayanan A, Jacobson M (2009) Computational studies MCB.24.2.765-773.2004
of protein regulation by post-translational phosphorylation. 36. Karolczak-Bayatti M, Sweeney M, Cheng J et al (2011) Acety-
Curr Opin Struct Biol 19:156–163. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j. lation of heat shock protein 20 (Hsp20) regulates human myo-
sbi.2009.02.007 metrial activity. J Biol Chem 286:34346–34355. https: //doi.
20. Johnson L, Lewis R (2001) Structural basis for control by phos- org/10.1074/jbc.M111.278549
phorylation. Chem Rev 101:2209–2242. https: //doi.org/10.1021/ 37. Somoza JR, Skene RJ, Katz BA et al (2004) Structural snap-
cr0002 25s shots of human HDAC8 provide insights into the class I histone
21. Ryšlavá H, Doubnerová V, Kavan D, Vaněk O (2013) Effect of deacetylases. Structure 12:1325–1334. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.
posttranslational modifications on enzyme function and assem- str.2004.04.012
bly. J Proteomics 92:80–109. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot 38. Deribe YL, Wild P, Chandrashaker A et al (2009) Regulation of
.2013.03.025 epidermal growth factor receptor trafficking by lysine deacety-
22. Kelly RDW, Cowley SM (2013) The physiological roles of his- lase HDAC6. Sci Signal 22:ra84. https: //doi.org/10.1126/scisi
tone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2: complex co-stars with mul- gnal.200057 6
tiple leading parts. Biochem Soc Trans 41:741–749. https: //doi. 39. Le Roy C, Wrana J (2005) Clathrin- and non-clathrin-mediated
org/10.1042/BST201 30010 endocytic regulation of cell signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
23. Milazzo G, Mercatelli D, Di Muzio G et al (2020) Histone dea- 6:112–126. https: //doi.org/10.1038/nrm157 1
cetylases (HDACs): evolution, specificity, role in transcriptional 40. Williams KA, Zhang M, Xiang S et al (2013) Extracellular sig-
complexes, and pharmacological actionability. Genes (Basel) nal-regulated kinase (erk) phosphorylates histone deacetylase 6
11:556. https: //doi.org/10.3390/genes1 10505 56 (HDAC6) at serine 1035 to stimulate cell migration. J Biol Chem
24. Pflum MKH, Tong JK, Lane WS, Schreiber SL (2001) Histone 288:33156–33170. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.472506
deacetylase 1 phosphorylation promotes enzymatic activity and 41. Chen S, Owens G, Makarenkova H, Edelman D (2010) HDAC6
complex formation. J Biol Chem 276:47733–47741. https: //doi. regulates mitochondrial transport in hippocampal neurons. PLoS
org/10.1074/jbc.M10559 0200 ONE 5:e10848. https: //doi.org/10.1371/journa l.pone.001084 8
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 42 S. Bahl, E. Seto
42. Reynolds I, Malaiyandi L, Coash M, Rintoul G (2004) Mito- 14-3-3 to histone deacetylase 5. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
chondrial trafficking in neurons: a key variable in neurodegenera- 97:14400–14405. https: //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.260501 497
tion? J Bioenerg Biomembr 36:283–286. https: //doi.org/10.1023/ 58. Sen N, Kumari R, Singh MI, Das S (2013) HDAC5, a key com-
B:JOBB.000004 1754. 78313. c2 ponent in temporal regulation of p53-mediated transactivation
43. Trimmer P, Borland M (2005) Differentiated Alzheimer’s disease in response to genotoxic stress. Mol Cell 52:406–420. https: //
transmitochondrial cybrid cell lines exhibit reduced organelle doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel .2013.09.003
movement. Antioxid Redox Signal 7:1101–1109. https: //doi. 59. Greco TM, Yu F, Guise AJ, Cristea IM (2011) Nuclear import
org/10.1089/ars.2005.7.1101 of histone deacetylase 5 by requisite nuclear localization signal
44. Kong D, Zhan Y, Liu Z et al (2016) SIRT1-mediated ERβ sup- phosphorylation. Mol Cell Proteom 10(M110):004317. https: //
pression in the endothelium contributes to vascular aging. Aging doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M110.004317
Cell 15:1092–1102. https: //doi.org/10.1111/acel.12515 60. Ha CH, Kim JY, Zhao J et al (2010) PKA phosphorylates his-
45. Kang H, Jung J-W, Kim MK, Chung JH (2009) CK2 is the regula- tone deacetylase 5 and prevents its nuclear export, leading to
tor of SIRT1 substrate-binding affinity, deacetylase activity and the inhibition of gene transcription and cardiomyocyte hyper-
cellular response to DNA-damage. PLoS ONE 4:e6611. https: // trophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:15467–15472. https: //doi.
doi.org/10.1371/journa l.pone.000661 1 org/10.1073/pnas.100046 2107
46. Guo X, Williams JG, Schug TT, Li X (2010) DYRK1A and 61. Gomis-Coloma C, Velasco-Aviles S, Gomez-Sanchez JA et al
DYRK3 promote cell survival through phosphorylation and (2018) Class IIa histone deacetylases link cAMP signaling to
activation of SIRT1. J Biol Chem 285:13223–13232. https: // the myelin transcriptional program of Schwann cells. J Cell
doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.102574 Biol 217:1249–1268. https: //doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201611 150
47. Conrad E, Polonio-Vallon T, Meister M et al (2016) HIPK2 62. Walkinshaw DR, Weist R, Xiao L et al (2013) Dephospho-
restricts SIRT1 activity upon severe DNA damage by a phospho- rylation at a conserved SP motif governs cAMP sensitivity
rylation-controlled mechanism. Cell Death Differ 23:110–122. and nuclear localization of class IIa histone deacetylases. J
https: //doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2015.75 Biol Chem 288:5591–5605. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.
48. Lee CW, Wong LL, Tse EY et al (2012) AMPK promotes p53 M112.445668
acetylation via phosphorylation and inactivation of SIRT1 63. Weeks KL, Ranieri A, Karaś A et al (2017) β-adrenergic
in liver cancer cells. Cancer Res 72:4394–4404. https: //doi. stimulation induces histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) nuclear
org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0429 accumulation in cardiomyocytes by B55α-PP2A-mediated
49. Van Meter M, Simon M, Tombline G et al (2016) JNK phos- dephosphorylation. J Am Heart Assoc 6:e004861. https: //doi.
phorylates SIRT6 to stimulate DNA double- strand break repair org/10.1161/JAHA.116.004861
in response to oxidative stress by recruiting PARP1 to DNA 64. Paroni G, Cernotta N, Dello Russo C et al (2008) PP2A regu-
breaks. Cell Rep 16:2641–2650. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.celre lates HDAC4 nuclear import. Mol Biol Cell 19:665–667. https
p.2016.08.006 ://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e07-06-0623
50. Movahedi Naini S, Sheridan AM, Force T, Shah JV, Bonventre 65. Nasrin N, Kaushik VK, Fortier E et al (2009) JNK1 phospho-
JV (2015) Group IVA cytosolic phospholipase A2 regulates the rylates SIRT1 and promotes its enzymatic activity. PLoS ONE
G2-to-M transition by modulating the activity of tumor suppres- 4:e8414. https: //doi.org/10.1371/journa l.pone.000841 4
sor SIRT2. Mol Cell Biol 35:3768–3784. https: //doi.org/10.1128/ 66. Berthiaume M, Boufaied N, Moisan A, Gaudreau L (2006)
MCB.00184- 15 High levels of oxidative stress globally inhibit gene transcrip-
51. Pandithage R, Lilischkis R, Harting K et al (2008) The regulation tion and histone acetylation. DNA Cell Biol 25:124–134. https
of SIRT2 function by cyclin-dependent kinases affects cell motil- ://doi.org/10.1089/dna.2006.25.124
ity. J Cell Biol 180:915–929. https: //doi.org/10.1083/jcb.20070 67. Tanno M, Sakamoto J, Miura T, Shimamoto K, Horio Y (2007)
7126 Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the NAD + -dependent histone
52. Wang AH, Kruhlak MJ, Wu J et al (2000) Regulation deacetylase SIRT1. J Biol Chem 282:6823–6832. https: //doi.
of histone deacetylase 4 by binding of 14-3-3 proteins. org/10.1074/jbc.M60955 4200
Mol Cell Biol 20:6904–6912. https: //doi.org/10.1128/ 68. Gonzalez-Zuñiga M, Contreras PS, Estrada LD et al (2014)
mcb.20.18.6904-6912.2000 c-Abl stabilizes HDAC2 levels by tyrosine phosphorylation
53. Shimizu E, Nakatani T, He Z, Partridge NC (2014) Parathyroid repressing neuronal gene expression in Alzheimer’s dis-
hormone regulates histone deacetylase (HDAC) 4 through pro- ease. Mol Cell 56:163–173. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.molce
tein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation and dephosphorylation l.2014.08.013
in osteoblastic cells. J Biol Chem 289:21340–21350. https: //doi. 69. Wen L, Chen Z, Zhang F et al (2013) Ca2 +/calmodulin-
org/10.1074/jbc.M114.550699 dependent protein kinase kinase β phosphorylation of Sirtuin
54. McKinsey TA, Zhang CL, Olson EN (2001) Identification of a 1 in endothelium is atheroprotective. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
signal-responsive nuclear export sequence in class II histone dea- 110:E2420–E2427. https: //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.130935 4110
cetylases. Mol Cell Biol 21:6312–6321. https: //doi.org/10.1128/ 70. Cernotta N, Clocchiatti A, Florean C, Brancolini C (2011)
MCB.21.18.6312-6321.2001 Ubiquitin-dependent degradation of HDAC4, a new regulator
55. Walkinshaw DR, Weist R, Kim G-W et al (2013) The tumor of random cell motility. Mol Biol Cell 22:278–289. https ://doi.
suppressor kinase LKB1 activates the downstream kinases SIK2 org/10.1091/mbc.E10-07-0616
and SIK3 to stimulate nuclear export of class IIa histone deacety- 71. Rechsteiner M, Rogers SW (1996) PEST sequences and regula-
lases. J Biol Chem 288:9345–9362. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc. tion by proteolysis. Trends Biochem Sci 21:267–271. https: //doi.
M113.456996 org/10.1016/S0968- 0004(96)10031- 1
56. Dequiedt F, Martin M, Von Blume J et al (2006) New role for 72. Choi YH, Kim H, Lee SH, Jin Y-H, Lee KY (2014) Src regu-
hPar-1 Kinases EMK and C-TAK1 in regulating localization and lates the activity of SIRT2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
activity of class IIa histone deacetylases. Mol Cell Biol 26:7086– 450:1120–1125. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.117
7102. https: //doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00231- 06 73. Thirumurthi U, Shen J, Xia W et al (2014) MDM2-mediated
57. McKinsey TA, Zhang CL, Olson EN (2000) Activation of the degradation of SIRT6 phosphorylated by AKT1 promotes tumo-
myocyte enhancer factor-2 transcription factor by calcium/ rigenesis and trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer. Sci Signal
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-stimulated binding of 7:71. https: //doi.org/10.1126/scisig nal.200507 6
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 443
74. Sun L, Fan G, Shan P et al (2016) Regulation of energy home- histone deacetylases in B lymphocytes. Mol Cell Biol 26:1569–
ostasis by the ubiquitin-independent REGγ proteasome. Nat 1577. https: //doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.4.1569-1577.2006
Commun 7:12497. https: //doi.org/10.1038/ncomms 12497 92. Parra M, Kasler H, McKinsey TA, Olson EN, Verdin E (2005)
75. Hwang JS, Ham SA, Yoo T et al (2016) Upregulation of MKP-7 Protein kinase D1 phosphorylates HDAC7 and induces its
in response to rosiglitazone treatment ameliorates lipopoly- nuclear export after T-cell receptor activation. J Biol Chem
saccharide-induced destabilization of SIRT1 by inactivating 280:13762–13770. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M41339 6200
JNK. Pharmacol Res 114:47–55. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j. 93. Dequiedt F, Van Lint J, Lecomte E et al (2005) Phosphorylation
phrs.2016.10.014 of histone deacetylase 7 by protein kinase D mediates T cell
76. Gao Z, Zhang J, Kheterpal I et al (2011) Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) receptor-induced Nur77 expression and apoptosis. J Exp Med
protein degradation in response to persistent c-Jun N-termi- 201:793–804. https: //doi.org/10.1084/jem.200420 34
nal kinase 1 (JNK1) activation contributes to hepatic stea- 94. Navarro MN, Goebel J, Feijoo-Carnero C, Morrice N, Cantrell
tosis in obesity. J Biol Chem 286:22227–22234. https: //doi. DA (2011) Phosphoproteomic analysis reveals an intrinsic path-
org/10.1074/jbc.M111.228874 way for the regulation of histone deacetylase 7 that controls the
77. Ford J, Ahmed S, Allison S, Jiang M, Milner J (2008) JNK2- function of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Nat Immunol 12:352–361.
dependent regulation of SIRT1 protein stability. Cell Cycle https: //doi.org/10.1038/ni.2008
7:3091–3097. https: //doi.org/10.4161/cc.7.19.6799 95. Pais TF, Szegő ÉM, Marques O et al (2013) The NAD-depend-
78. Guise AJ, Greco TM, Zhang IY, Yu F, Cristea IM (2012) ent deacetylase sirtuin 2 is a suppressor of microglial activation
Aurora B-dependent regulation of class IIa histone deacety- and brain inflammation. EMBO J 32:2603–2616. https: //doi.
lases by mitotic nuclear localization signal phosphorylation. org/10.1038/emboj. 2013.200
Mol Cell Proteom 11:1220–1229. https: //doi.org/10.1074/mcp. 96. Pereira JM, Chevalier C, Chaze T et al (2018) Infection reveals
M112.021030 a modification of SIRT2 critical for chromatin association. Cell
79. Ling H, Peng L, Wang J, Rahhal R, Seto E (2018) Histone Rep 23:1124–1137. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep .2018.03.116
deacetylase SIRT1 targets Plk2 to regulate centriole duplica- 97. Liu Y, Schneider MF (2013) Opposing HDAC4 nuclear fluxes
tion. Cell Rep 25:2851–2865. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.celre due to phosphorylation by β-adrenergic activated protein kinase
p.2018.11.025 A or by activity or Epac activated CaMKII in skeletal muscle
80. Sasaki T, Maier B, Koclega KD et al (2008) Phosphorylation fibres. J Physiol 591:3605–3623. https: //doi.org/10.1113/jphys
regulates SIRT1 function. PLoS ONE 3:e4020. https: //doi. iol.2013.256263
org/10.1371/journa l.pone.000402 0 98. McKinsey TA, Zhang CL, Lu J, Olson EN (2000) Signal-depend-
81. North BJ, Verdin E (2007) Mitotic regulation of SIRT2 by cyc- ent nuclear export of a histone deacetylase regulates muscle dif-
lin-dependent kinase 1-dependent phosphorylation. J Biol Chem ferentiation. Nature 408:106–111. https: //doi.org/10.1038/35040
282:19546–19555. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M70299 0200 593
82. Eckschlager T, Plch J, Stiborova M, Hrabeta J (2017) Histone 99. Deng X, Ewton DZ, Mercer SE, Friedman E (2005) Mirk/
deacetylase inhibitors as anticancer drugs. Int J Mol Sci. https: // dyrk1B decreases the nuclear accumulation of class II histone
doi.org/10.3390/ijms18 07141 4 deacetylases during skeletal muscle differentiation. J Biol Chem
83. Falkenberg KJ, Johnstone RW (2014) Histone deacetylases and 280:4894–4905. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M41189 4200
their inhibitors in cancer, neurological diseases and immune 100. Ha CH, Wang W, Jhun BS et al (2008) Protein kinase D-depend-
disorders. Nat Rev Drug Discov 13:673–691. https ://doi. ent phosphorylation and nuclear export of histone deacetylase 5
org/10.1038/nrd436 0 mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-induced gene expres-
84. Lau AW, Liu P, Inuzuka H, Gao D (2014) SIRT1 phosphorylation sion and angiogenesis. J Biol Chem 283:14590–14599. https: //
by AMP-activated protein kinase regulates p53 acetylation. Am doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M80026 4200
J Cancer Res 4:245–255 101. Ha CH, Jhun BS, Kao HY, Jin ZG (2008) VEGF stimulates
85. Masui K, Tanaka K, Akhavan D et al (2013) mTOR complex 2 HDAC7 phosphorylation and cytoplasmic accumulation mod-
controls glycolytic metabolism in glioblastoma through FoxO ulating matrix metalloproteinase expression and angiogen-
acetylation and upregulation of c-Myc. Cell Metab 18:726–739. esis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28:1782–1788. https: //doi.
https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2013.09.013 org/10.1161/ATVBAH A.108.172528
86. Masui K, Tanaka K, Ikegami S et al (2015) Glucose-dependent 102. Wang S, Li X, Parra M et al (2008) Control of endothelial cell
acetylation of Rictor promotes targeted cancer therapy resist- proliferation and migration by VEGF signaling to histone dea-
ance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:9406–9411. https ://doi. cetylase 7. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:7738–7743. https: //doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.151175 9112 org/10.1073/pnas.080285 7105
87. Liu R, Fan M, Candas D et al (2015) CDK1-mediated SIRT3 103. Gemini-Piperni S, Milani R, Bertazzo S et al (2014) Kinome
activation enhances mitochondrial function and tumor radi- profiling of osteoblasts on hydroxyapatite opens new avenues on
oresistance. Mol Cancer Ther 14:2090–2102. https: //doi. biomaterial cell signaling. Biotechnol Bioeng 111:1900–1905.
org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0017 https: //doi.org/10.1002/bit.25246
88. Conze D, Weiss L, Regen PS et al (2001) Autocrine produc- 104. Carnegie GK, Soughayer J, Smith FD et al (2008) AKAP-Lbc
tion of interleukin 6 causes multidrug resistance in breast cancer mobilizes a cardiac hypertrophy signaling pathway. Mol Cell
cells. Cancer Res 61:8851–8858 32:169–179. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel .2008.08.030
89. Wang W, Li F, Xu Y et al (2018) JAK1-mediated Sirt1 phospho- 105. Little GH, Bai Y, Williams T, Poizat C (2007) Nuclear calcium/
rylation functions as a negative feedback of the JAK1-STAT3 calmodulin-dependent protein kinase iidelta preferentially trans-
pathway. J Biol Chem 293:11067–11075. https: //doi.org/10.1074/ mits signals to histone deacetylase 4 in cardiac cells. J Biol Chem
jbc.RA117. 001387 282:7219–7231. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M60428 1200
90. Gao SP, Mark KG, Leslie K et al (2007) Mutations in the EGFR 106. Huynh QK, McKinsey TA (2006) Protein kinase D directly phos-
kinase domain mediate STAT3 activation via IL-6 production phorylates histone deacetylase 5 via a random sequential kinetic
in human lung adenocarcinomas. J Clin Invest 117:3846–3856. mechanism. Arch Biochem Biophys 450:141–148. https: //doi.
https: //doi.org/10.1172/JCI318 71 org/10.1016/j.abb.2006.02.014
91. Matthews SA, Liu P, Spitaler M et al (2006) Essential role for 107. Chang CW, Lee L, Yu D et al (2013) Acute β-adrenergic acti-
protein kinase D family kinases in the regulation of class II vation triggers nuclear import of histone deacetylase 5 and
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

4 44 S. Bahl, E. Seto
delays G(q)-induced transcriptional activation. J Biol Chem 124. Singh R, Kaushik S, Wang Y et al (2009) Autophagy regu-
288:192–204. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.382358 lates lipid metabolism. Nature 458:1131–1135. https: //doi.
108. Huynh QK (2011) Evidence for the phosphorylation of ser- org/10.1038/nature 07976
ine259 of histone deacetylase 5 by protein kinase Cδ. Arch 125. Zhang Y, Goldman S, Baerga R et al (2009) Adipose-specific
Biochem Biophys 506:173–180. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j. deletion of autophagy-related gene 7 (atg7) in mice reveals a
abb.2010.12.005 role in adipogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:19860–19865.
109. Chen L, Hahn H, Wu G et al (2001) Opposing cardioprotective https: //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.090604 8106
actions and parallel hypertrophic effects of delta PKC and epsi- 126. Lu J, Xu Q, Ji M et al (2017) The phosphorylation status of T522
lon PKC. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:11114–11119. https: //doi. modulates tissue-specific functions of SIRT1 in energy metabo-
org/10.1073/pnas.191369 098 lism in mice. EMBO Rep 18:841–857. https: //doi.org/10.15252
110. Eom GH, Cho YK, Ko JH et al (2011) Casein kinase-2α1 induces /embr.201643 803
hypertrophic response by phosphorylation of histone deacetylase 127. Finsterwald C, Carrard A, Martin JL (2013) Role of salt-induc-
2 S394 and its activation in the heart. Circulation 123:2392– ible kinase 1 in the activation of MEF2-dependent transcription
2403. https: //doi.org/10.1161/CIRCUL ATION AHA.110.003665 by BDNF. PLoS ONE 8:e54545. https: //doi.org/10.1371/journ
111. Wang H, Liu S, Liu S et al (2017) Enhanced expression and al.pone.005454 5
phosphorylation of Sirt7 activates smad2 and ERK signaling and 128. Choi M, Lee SH, Wang SE et al (2015) Ketamine produces
promotes the cardiac fibrosis differentiation upon angiotensin-II antidepressant-like effects through phosphorylation-dependent
stimulation. PLoS ONE 12:e0178530. https: //doi.org/10.1371/ nuclear export of histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) in rats. Proc
journa l.pone.017853 0 Natl Acad Sci USA 112:15755–15760. https: //doi.org/10.1073/
112. Wang S, Jiang B, Zhang T et al (2015) Insulin and mTOR path- pnas.151391 3112
way regulate HDAC3-mediated deacetylation and activation of 129. Watabe M, Nakaki T (2011) Protein kinase CK2 regulates the
PGK1. PLoS Biol 13:e1002243. https: //doi.org/10.1371/journ formation and clearance of aggresomes in response to stress. J
al.pbio.100224 3 Cell Sci 124:1519–1532. https: //doi.org/10.1242/jcs.081778
113. Mihaylova MM, Vasquez DS, Ravnskjaer K et al (2011) Class IIa 130. Peng S, Zhao S, Yan F et al (2015) HDAC2 selectively regulates
histone deacetylases are hormone-activated regulators of FOXO FOXO3a-mediated gene transcription during oxidative stress-
and mammalian glucose homeostasis. Cell 145:607–621. https induced neuronal cell death. J Neurosci 35:1250–1259. https: //
://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.043 doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO SCI.2444-14.2015
114. McGee SL, van Denderen BJ, Howlett KF et al (2008) AMP- 131. Hornbeck PV, Zhang B, Murray B et al (2015) PhosphoSitePlus,
activated protein kinase regulates GLUT4 transcription by phos- 2014: mutations, PTMs and recalibrations. Nucleic Acids Res
phorylating histone deacetylase 5. Diabetes 57:860–867. https: // 43:D512–D520. https: //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku126 7
doi.org/10.2337/db07-0843 132. Diella F, Cameron S, Gemünd C et al (2004) Phospho.ELM:
115. Leturque A, Loizeau M, Vaulont S, Salminen M, Girard J (1996) a database of experimentally verified phosphorylation sites
Improvement of insulin action in diabetic transgenic mice selec- in eukaryotic proteins. BMC Bioinform 5:79. https: //doi.
tively overexpressing GLUT4 in skeletal muscle. Diabetes org/10.1186/1471-2105-5-79
45:23–27. https: //doi.org/10.2337/diab.45.1.23 133. Diella F, Gould CM, Chica C, Via A, Gibson TJ (2008) Phospho.
116. Ren JM, Marshall BA, Mueckler MM et al (1995) Overexpres- ELM: a database of phosphorylation sites–update 2008. Nucleic
sion of Glut4 protein in muscle increases basal and insulin-stim- Acids Res 36:D240–D244. https: //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm772
ulated whole body glucose disposal in conscious mice. J Clin 134. Dinkel H, Chica C, Via A et al (2011) Phospho.ELM: a data-
Invest 95:429–432. https: //doi.org/10.1172/JCI117 673 base of phosphorylation sites–update 2011. Nucleic Acids Res
117. Tsao TS, Burcelin R, Katz EB, Huang L, Charron MJ (1996) 39:D261–D267. https: //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq110 4
Enhanced insulin action due to targeted GLUT4 overexpres- 135. Gnad F, Ren S, Cox J et al (2007) PHOSIDA (phosphorylation
sion exclusively in muscle. Diabetes 45:28–36. https: //doi. site database): management, structural and evolutionary inves-
org/10.2337/diab.45.1.28 tigation, and prediction of phosphosites. Genome Biol 8:R250.
118. Gerhart-Hines Z, Dominy JE Jr, Blättler SM et al (2011) The https: //doi.org/10.1186/gb-2007-8-11-r250
cAMP/PKA pathway rapidly activates SIRT1 to promote fatty 136. Gnad F, Gunawardena J, Mann M (2011) PHOSIDA 2011: the
acid oxidation independently of changes in NAD(+). Mol Cell posttranslational modification database. Nucleic Acids Res
44:851–863. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel .2011.12.005 39:D253–D260. https: //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq115 9
119. Nedergaard J, Cannon B (2010) The changed metabolic world 137. Blom N, Gammeltoft S, Brunak S (1999) Sequence and struc-
with human brown adipose tissue: therapeutic visions. Cell ture-based prediction of eukaryotic protein phosphorylation
Metab 11:268–272. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2010.03.007 sites. J Mol Biol 294:1351–1362. https: //doi.org/10.1006/
120. Feng B, Jiao P, Helou Y et al (2014) Mitogen-activated pro- jmbi.1999.3310
tein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3)-deficient mice are resistant 138. Blom N, Sicheritz-Pontén T, Gupta R, Gammeltoft S, Brunak S
to diet-induced obesity. Diabetes 63:2924–2934. https: //doi. (2004) Prediction of post-translational glycosylation and phos-
org/10.2337/db14-0066 phorylation of proteins from the amino acid sequence. Proteom-
121. Choi SE, Kwon S, Seok S et al (2017) Obesity-linked phospho- ics 4:1633–1649. https: //doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200300 771
rylation of SIRT1 by casein kinase 2 inhibits its nuclear localiza- 139. Xue Y, Zhou F, Zhu M et al (2005) GPS: a comprehensive www
tion and promotes fatty liver. Mol Cell Biol 37:e00006–e00017. server for phosphorylation sites prediction. Nucleic Acids Res
https: //doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00006- 17 33:W184–W187. https: //doi.org/10.1093/nar/gki393
122. Dong S, Jia C, Zhang S et al (2013) The REGγ protea- 140. Xue Y, Ren J, Gao X et al (2008) GPS 2.0, a tool to predict
some regulates hepatic lipid metabolism through inhibition of kinase-specific phosphorylation sites in hierarchy. Mol Cell
autophagy. Cell Metab 18:380–391. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j. Proteomics 7:1598–1608. https: //doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M7005
cmet.2013.08.012 74-MCP200
123. Czaja MJ (2010) Autophagy in health and disease. 2. Regulation 141. Xue Y, Liu Z, Cao J et al (2011) GPS 2.1: enhanced prediction of
of lipid metabolism and storage by autophagy: pathophysiologi- kinase-specific phosphorylation sites with an algorithm of motif
cal implications. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 298:C973–C978. length selection. Protein Eng Des Sel 24:255–260. https ://doi.
https: //doi.org/10.1152/ajpcel l.00527. 2009 org/10.1093/protei n/gzq094
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

Regulation of histone deacetylase activities and functions by phosphorylation and its… 445
142. Amanchy R, Periaswamy B, Mathivanan S et al (2007) A curated subset of class IIa histone deacetylases. FEBS Lett 584:1103–
compendium of phosphorylation motifs. Nat Biotechnol 25:285– 1110. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.febsle t.2010.02.057
286. https: //doi.org/10.1038/nbt030 7-285 157. Lee C-W, Yang F-C, Chang H-Y et al (2014) Interaction between
143. Gu TL, Nardone J, Wang Y et al (2011) Survey of activated salt-inducible kinase 2 and protein phosphatase 2A regulates the
FLT3 signaling in leukemia. PLoS ONE 6:19169. https ://doi. activity of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I and
org/10.1371/journa l.pone.001916 9 protein phosphatase methylesterase-1. J Biol Chem 289:21108–
144. Kettenbach AN, Schweppe DK, Faherty BK et al (2011) Quan- 21119. https: //doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.540229
titative phosphoproteomics identifies substrates and functional 158. Taniguchi M, Carreira MB, Smith LN, Zirlin BC, Neve RL,
modules of Aurora and Polo-like kinase activities in mitotic cells. Cowan CW (2012) Histone deacetylase 5 limits cocaine reward
Sci Signal 4:rs5. https: //doi.org/10.1126/scisig nal.200149 7 through cAMP-induced nuclear import. Neuron 73:108–120.
145. Mertins P, Yang F, Liu T et al (2014) Ischemia in tumors induces https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron .2011.10.032
early and sustained phosphorylation changes in stress kinase 159. von Blume J, Knippschild U, Dequiedt F et al (2007) Phospho-
pathways but does not affect global protein levels. Mol Cell Pro- rylation at Ser244 by CK1 determines nuclear localization and
teom 13:1690–1704. https: //doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.036392 substrate targeting of PKD2. EMBO J 26:4619–4633. https: //doi.
146. Mertins P, Mani DR, Ruggles KV et al (2016) Proteogenomics org/10.1038/sj.emboj. 760189 1
connects somatic mutations to signalling in breast cancer. Nature 160. Shan P, Fan G, Sun L et al (2017) SIRT1 functions as a nega-
534:55–62. https: //doi.org/10.1038/nature 18003 tive regulator of eukaryotic Poly(A)RNA transport. Curr Biol
147. Yu G, Xiao CL, Lu CH et al (2011) Phosphoproteome profile of 27:2271–2284.e5. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.06.040
human lung cancer cell line A549. Mol BioSyst 7:472–479. https 161. Ramakrishnan G, Davaakhuu G, Kaplun L et al (2014) Sirt2
://doi.org/10.1039/c0mb00 055h deacetylase Is a novel AKT binding partner critical for AKT
148. Hunter T (2009) Tyrosine phosphorylation: thirty years activation by insulin. J Biol Chem 289:6054–6066. https: //doi.
and counting. Curr Opin Cell Biol 21:140–146. https: //doi. org/10.1074/jbc.M113.537266
org/10.1016/j.ceb.2009.01.028 162. Miteva YV, Cristea IM (2014) A proteomic perspective of sirtuin
149. Hunter T (2007) Treatment for chronic myelogenous leukemia: 6 (SIRT6) phosphorylation and interactions and their dependence
the long road to imatinib. J Clin Invest 117:2036–2043. https: // on its catalytic activity. Mol Cell Proteomics 13:168–183. https
doi.org/10.1172/JCI316 91 ://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.032847
150. Arora A, Scholar EM (2005) Role of tyrosine kinase inhibitors 163. Bian Y, Song C, Cheng K et al (2014) An enzyme assisted RP-
in cancer therapy. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 315:971–979. https: // RPLC approach for in-depth analysis of human liver phospho-
doi.org/10.1124/jpet.105.084145 proteome. J Proteomics 96:253–262. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.
151. Wu P, Nielsen TE, Clausen MH (2015) FDA-approved small- jprot. 2013.11.014
molecule kinase inhibitors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 36:422–439. 164. Pighi C, Gu T-L, Dalai I et al (2011) Phospho-proteomic analysis
https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2015.04.005 of mantle cell lymphoma cells suggests a pro-survival role of
152. Meng F, Han M, Zheng B et al. (2009) All-trans retinoic acid B-cell receptor signaling. Cell Oncol (Dordr) 34:141–153. https
increases KLF4 acetylation by inducing HDAC2 phosphoryla- ://doi.org/10.1007/s13402 -011-0019-7
tion and its dissociation from KLF4 in vascular smooth muscle 165. Yu L-R, Zhu Z, Chan KC et al (2007) Improved titanium dioxide
cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 387:13–18. https: //doi. enrichment of phosphopeptides from HeLa cells and high con-
org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.112 fident phosphopeptide identification by cross-validation of MS/
153. Grozinger CM, Schreiber SL (2000) Regulation of histone dea- MS and MS/MS/MS spectra. J Proteome Res 6:4150–4162. https
cetylase 4 and 5 and transcriptional activity by 14–3-3-dependent ://doi.org/10.1021/pr0701 52u
cellular localization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:7835–7840. 166. Tsai C-F, Wang Y-T, Yen H-Y et al (2015) Large-scale determina-
https: //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.140199 597 tion of absolute phosphorylation stoichiometries in human cells
154. Chang J-K, Ni Y, Han L et al. (2017) Protein kinase D1 (PKD1) by motif-targeting quantitative proteomics. Nat Commun 6:6622.
phosphorylation on Ser203 by type I p21-activated kinase (PAK) https: //doi.org/10.1038/ncomms 7622
regulates PKD1 localization. J Biol Chem 292:9523–9539. https
://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.771394 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
155. Guise AJ, Mathias RA, Rowland EA, Yu F, Cristea IM (2014) jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Probing phosphorylation-dependent protein interactions within
functional domains of histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5). Proteom-
ics 14:2156–2166. https: //doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400 092
156. Harrison BC, Huynh K, Lundgaard GL et al. (2010) Protein
kinase C-related kinase targets nuclear localization signals in a
1 3

---PAGE BREAK---

