Correspondence
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of should be included in the calculation. 1 Siderowf A, Concha-Marambio L, Lafontant DE,
Ottawa Brain and Mind Research Institute, Division Thus, to facilitate comparison of et al. Assessment of heterogeneity among
of Neurology, Department of Medicine, participants in the Parkinson’s Progression
The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada (TAM); the SAA results from the PPMI study Markers Initiative cohort using α-synuclein
Edmond J Safra Program in Parkinson’s Disease with those previously published seed amplification: a cross-sectional study.
Lancet Neurol 2023; 22: 407–17.
(LVK), the Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement of standalone Parkinson’s disease
2 Russo MJ, Orru CD, Concha-Marambio L, et al.
Disorders Clinic (LVK), the Krembil Research
biomarkers,3 we have recalculated the High diagnostic performance of independent
Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network (LVK); Division of Neurology, sensitivity to include the participants a d l e p t h e a ct -s io y n n u o c f l e e i a n r l s y e P e a d r k a i m ns p o li n fi ’ c s a d t i i s o e n a s a e s . s ays for
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, designated as SWEDD. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021; 9: 179–92.
Toronto, ON, Canada (LVK) 373 participants with sporadic 3 Brockmann K, Quadalti C, Lerche S, et al.
1 Siderowf A, Concha-Marambio L, Lafontant DE, Parkinson’s disease were included in Association between CSF alpha-synuclein
et al. Assessment of heterogeneity among seeding activity and genetic status in Parkinson’s
participants in the Parkinson’s Progression the PPMI study, as well as 54 people disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
Markers Initiative cohort using α-synuclein categorised as SWEDD and 163 healthy Acta Neuropathol Commun 2021; 9: 175.
seed amplification: a cross-sectional study. 4 Beach TG, Adler CH. Importance of low
controls. The proportion of SWEDD
Lancet Neurol 2023; 22: 407–17. diagnostic accuracy for early Parkinson’s
2 Okuzumi A, Hatano T, Matsumoto G, et al. (14%) is within the typical prevalence disease. Mov Disord 2018; 33: 1551–54.
Propagative α-synuclein seeds as serum range reported in other studies.4
biomarkers for synucleinopathies. Nat Med
2023; 29: 1448–55. In the PPMI study,1 Table 2 shows Authors’ reply
3 Berg D, Klein C. α-synuclein seed amplification that the sensitivity of the SAA for We are grateful to Blas Couto and
and its uses in Parkinson’s disease.
people with sporadic Parkinson’s colleagues, to Lorraine V Kalia and
Lancet Neurol 2023; 22: 369–71.
4 Chahine LM, Merchant K, Siderowf A, et al. disease (after exclusion of individuals Tiago A Mestre, and to Thomas Beach
Proposal for a biologic staging system of categorised as SWEDD) was 93·3%. and colleagues for their thoughtful
Parkinson’s disease. J Parkinsons Dis 2023;
Specificity for people designated as responses to our Article.
13: 297–309.
5 Höglinger GU, et al. Towards a biological SWEDD was 90·7%, which means that Couto and colleagues correctly point
definition of Parkinson’s disease. Preprints 49 participants with SWEDD had a out that individuals who identify as
2023; published online April 7. https://doi.
org/10.20944/preprints202304.0108.v1 negative result on the SAA, and five Latino or Hispanic are over-represented
(preprint). had a positive result. After combining within prodromal participants in our
the individuals with SWEDD with study. The reason for this imbalance is
We applaud Andrew Siderowf the people with sporadic Parkinson’s that many individuals with rapid eye
and colleagues for presenting the disease, 427 participants with sporadic movement sleep behaviour disorder
first rigorous and comprehensive Parkinson’s disease were initially in our study came from a single
evaluation of an α-synuclein seed included before DAT-SPECT, of whom clinical centre in Spain; it does not
amplification assay (SAA) in CSF.1 353 were classified with a positive indicate a meaningful epidemiological
Rigour was optimised by use of CSF result on the SAA. Thus, we calculate association. We agree that better
from individuals with Parkinson’s a combined sensitivity for the SAA representation of individuals from
disease enrolled in the Parkinson’s of 82·7%, rather than 93·3%. Specificity, diverse social and genetic backgrounds
Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI), as calculated against the healthy would improve the generalisability
and because the SAA was done by a controls group, is unchanged at 96·3%. of PPMI, as well as many other
laboratory previously shown to have an cohort studies.
TGB declares grants paid to his institution from the
excellent inter-laboratory agreement National Institute of Health (NIH) and the Kalia and Mestre propose that the
with two other reputable groups.2 Michael J Fox Foundation (MJFF), unrelated to the subgroup of people with a clinical
current work, consulting fees from Biogen and
However, the presented diagnostic diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease,
Aprinoia Therapeutics, honoraria from the Mayo
accuracy figures were not derived Clinic, Stanford University, and the Alzheimer’s but with negative α-synuclein seed
from the standalone SAA results but Association University of Antiochia, and stock in amplification assay (SAA) results,
Vivid Genomics. CAH declares grants paid to his
from the compound accuracy of SAA should be referred to as samples
institution from NIH, MJFF, and Arizona Biomedical
and dopamine transporter (DAT)- Research Commission, unrelated to the current without evidence of synuclein seeding
SPECT. Participants meeting all the work, consulting fees from Amneal, Avion, CND Life (SWESS), referencing the known
Sci, Neurocrine Precon Health, and XW Pharma,
PPMI clinical inclusion and exclusion term scans without evidence of
and stock in Cionic.
criteria for Parkinson’s disease were dopaminergic degeneration (SWEDD).
*Thomas G Beach, Charles H Adler,
excluded from the SAA sensitivity We understand and agree with the
Holly A Shill, Geidy E Serrano,
calculations if they had scans without points raised by Kalia and Mestre. The
Nan Zhang
evidence of dopamine deficiency challenge of classifying individuals
thomas.beach@bannerhealth.com
(SWEDD). To determine the sensitivity with clinical features of Parkinson’s
for the SAA alone, without the added Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, disease (and abnormal dopaminergic
USA (TGB, GES); Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, AZ,
benefit of a DAT-SPECT screening imaging), but with negative results on
USA (CAH, NZ); Barrow Neurological Institute,
test, people categorised as SWEDD Phoenix 85351, AZ, USA (HAS) α-synuclein seed amplification assay
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 22 November 2023 985

---PAGE BREAK---

Correspondence
(SAA), will provide an opportunity for individuals.3 Thus, we believe that,
the field to move from a clinical to a to best estimate the accuracy of the
biological definition of Parkinson’s SAA, it is important to include those
disease. We believe this step will be one people most likely to have Parkinson’s
of the most important contributions disease.
of the SAA and will improve We are heartened that our Article,
understanding of disease biology. along with others examining
We and others are actively engaged α-synuclein seed amplification across
in defining a biological classification the spectrum of neuronal synuclein
and staging system for disorders that diseases, has been a catalyst for a
feature α-synuclein pathology. Kalia thoughtful reconsideration of these
and Mestre also comment that a clinical entities,4 and the emergence of
biological definition of disease might a framework for biologically directed
be crucial for testing biologically based therapeutic development.5
disease-modifying treatments, but less
AS declares consultancy for Merck, Parkinson Study
important for symptomatic treatments Group; and honoraria from Bial. LC-M declares
in the course of clinical care. We agree employment for Amprion; stock ownership
(employee stock options) for Amprion; and patent
with these points, and believe that our
or patent applications numbers US
work will both provide more effective 20210277076A1, US 20210311077A1,
patient engagement in specific clinical US 20190353669A1, and US 20210223268A1.
CS declares employment for Amprion; stock
trials and enable targeted treatment
ownership for Amprion; honoraria (will receive
in the future, which is essential for royalties for the sale of seed amplification assay
a disease that most likely involves [SAA]) from Amprion; and patents or patent
applications, awarded and amplified in conjunction
multiple pathways.
with Amprion for the SAA assay. KM declares
Beach and colleagues also call consultancies for Invicro, MJFF, Roche, Calico, Coave,
attention to the distinction between Neuron23, Orbimed, Neuroderm, Sanofi, Takeda,
Merck, Lilly, Inhibikase, and Neuramedy.
clinical and biological definitions of
Parkinson’s disease. They note that the *Andrew Siderowf,
sensitivity for the SAA would be lower Luis Concha-Marambio,
if all people with clinical parkinsonism Kenneth Marek, Claudio Soto
were included in the calculation, siderowf@upenn.edu
rather than only those individuals Department of Neurology, Penn Perelman School of
who had both clinical features of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA (AS),
Research and Development Unit, Amprion,
Parkinson’s disease and abnormal
San Diego, CA, USA (LC-M), Institute for
dopamine transporter imaging. Neurodegenerative Disorders, New Haven, CT, USA
SWEDD participants, who—as noted (KM), Department of Neurology, University of Texas
McGovern Medical School at Houston,TX, USA (CS)
above—have features of parkinsonism
but normal imaging, were excluded. 1 Marek K, Seibyl J, Eberly S, et al. Longitudinal
follow-up of SWEDD subjects in the PRECEPT
Including SWEDD participants in study. Neurology 2014; 82: 1791–97.
the sensitivity calculation makes the 2 Adler CH, Beach TG, Hentz JG, et al. Low clinical
diagnostic accuracy of early vs advanced
sensitivity lower than reported in our
Parkinson disease: clinicopathologic study.
paper (82·7% vs 93·3%). Neurology 2014; 83: 406–12.
The issue raised by Beach and 3 Marshall VL, Reininger CB, Marquardt M, et al.
Parkinson’s disease is overdiagnosed clinically
colleagues highlights the low
at baseline in diagnostically uncertain cases:
diagnostic accuracy of early a 3-year European multicenter study with
repeat [123I]FP-CIT SPECT. Mov Disord 2009;
Parkinson’s disease, an area in
24: 500–08.
which Beach (with Charles Adler) 4 Weintraub D. What’s in a name? The time has
has provided some of the most come to unify Parkinson’s disease and
dementia with Lewy bodies. Mov Disord 2023;
compelling evidence.2 Over time,
published online Aug 23. DOI:10.1002/
several participants categorised as mds.29590.
SWEDD in PPMI have developed 5 Chahine LM, Merchant K, Siderowf A, et al.
Proposal for a biologic staging system of
progressive parkinsonism, but many Parkinson’s disease. J Parkinsons Dis 2023;
have not, consistent with other 13: 297–309.
longitudinal follow-up studies of such
986 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 22 November 2023

---PAGE BREAK---

