nature reviews neurology https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-024-01043-w
Review article Check for updates
α-Synuclein pathology as a target
in neurodegenerative diseases
Hyejin Park 1,2,3,4,9, Tae-In Kam 1,2,3,5,9, Valina L. Dawson 1,2,3,6,7,10 & Ted M. Dawson 1,2,3,6,8,10
Abstract Sections
α-Synuclein misfolds into pathological forms that lead to various Introduction
neurodegenerative diseases known collectively as α-synucleinopathies.
Early characterization
In this Review, we provide a comprehensive overview of pivotal of α-synuclein pathology
advances in α-synuclein research. We examine structural features The α-synuclein protein
and physiological functions of α-synuclein and summarize current
α-Synuclein detection
insights into key post-translational modifications, such as nitration, methods
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation and truncation, Targeting pathological
considering their contributions to neurodegeneration. We also mechanisms in
α-synucleinopathies
highlight the existence of disease-specific α-synuclein strains and their
Conclusions and perspectives
mechanisms of pathological spread, and discuss seed amplification
assays and PET tracers as emerging diagnostic tools for detecting
pathological α-synuclein in clinical settings. We also discuss α-synuclein
aggregation and clearance mechanisms, and review cell-autonomous
and non-cell-autonomous processes that contribute to neuronal
death, including the roles of adaptive and innate immunity in
α-synuclein-driven neurodegeneration. Finally, we highlight promising
therapeutic approaches that target pathological α-synuclein and
provide insights into emerging areas of research.
1Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 2Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. 3Adrienne Helis Malvin and Diana Helis Henry Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, LA, USA.
4Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. 5Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. 6Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 7Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 8Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 9These authors contributed equally: Hyejin Park, Tae-In
Kam. 10These authors jointly supervised this work: Valina L. Dawson, Ted M. Dawson. e-mail: tdawson@jhmi.edu
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 32

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Key points 1993, α-synuclein was identified as the non-amyloid-β component of
amyloid plaques in AD11 (Fig. 1), and several reports have confirmed
the presence of pathological α-synuclein in AD and its contribution
• α-Synuclein can self-aggregate, oligomerize and fibrillize into to the pathogenesis of AD12.
different pathological strains that are associated with various α-Synuclein was first associated with PD in a study published in
α-synucleinopathies. 1997, in which a mutation in SNCA that led to an amino acid substitu-
tion in the α-synuclein protein13 was identified in autosomal dominant
• Parkinson disease and related α-synucleinopathies are widely PD13 (Fig. 1). Several further disease-associated mutations that result in
thought to be prion-like disorders, in which α-synuclein pathology amino acid substitutions in α-synuclein were subsequently reported14–22
spreads via a templating mechanism. (Fig. 2). Moreover, duplication and triplication of the SNCA locus has
been associated with familial PD, and the effects of these mutations
• Neurodegeneration that results from pathological α-synuclein is indicate a direct relationship between SNCA gene dosage and disease
mediated by cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous mechanisms. progression23,24. The evidence that SNCA mutations are associated with
autosomal dominant PD and that similar α-synuclein accumulation
• Parthanatos is the main cell death pathway by which pathological is observed in both familial and sporadic PD25,26 cemented the role of
α-synuclein induces neurodegeneration. pathological forms of α-synuclein in neurodegeneration.
In the same year that a mutation in α-synuclein was identified as a
• Pathological α-synuclein molecular pathway analysis has created cause of autosomal dominant PD, α-synuclein was also identified as a
new therapeutic opportunities for Parkinson disease and related major component of Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites in idiopathic PD
α-synucleinopathies. and DLB5,27 (Fig. 1). α-Synuclein immunoreactivity was also detected
in glial cytoplasmic inclusions in MSA28 and, shortly afterwards, in
• PET imaging and α-synuclein seed amplification assays will guide neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation29. Subsequent
future clinical studies by enabling the monitoring of α-synuclein work showed that phosphorylation of α-synuclein at Ser129 is a major
pathology and responses to therapy. post-translational modification of α-synuclein that was enriched in
Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites30 (Fig. 1), and this modification has
served as a marker of pathological α-synuclein31. Microscopy studies
Introduction have revealed that α-synuclein-immunopositive Lewy pathology is
The protein α-synuclein is predominantly expressed in the brain, and associated with crowding of organelle components and cellular mem-
the accumulation of pathological forms of this protein characterizes the branes, and cryo-electron tomography has revealed that pathological
group of neurodegenerative disorders known as α-synucleinopathies1. α-synuclein inclusions are composed of α-synuclein fibrils interwoven
The most prominent of these diseases is Parkinson disease (PD), but with cellular organelles32,33.
others include dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)2 and multiple system
atrophy (MSA)3. α-Synuclein pathology can also occur in Alzheimer The α-synuclein protein
disease (AD)4. The pathology results from aggregation of α-synuclein, Structure
leading to the formation of insoluble fibrils that are deposited in neu- α-Synuclein accounts for approximately 1% of the total cytosolic
rons, glia and nerve fibres, resulting in the formation of Lewy bodies proteins in the CNS34. The protein is made up of 140 highly charged
and Lewy neurites2,5. This aggregation of α-synuclein disrupts cellular amino acid residues that remain unstructured in aqueous solution11
function, leading to neuronal death and progressive loss of motor and and has three distinct domains: the N-terminal, central and C-terminal
cognitive functions. domains (Fig. 2). The N terminus (residues 1–60) contains four imper-
Genetic mutations and environmental factors are thought to con- fect KTKEGV repeats that have a crucial role in modulating interactions
tribute to the misfolding and aggregation of α-synuclein. The underly- of α-synuclein with membranes. The central hydrophobic domain
ing molecular mechanisms by which α-synuclein aggregation causes (residues 61–95), which is also called the NAC domain, confers a β-sheet
neurodegeneration are not fully understood, but several pathways structure to α-synuclein and is crucial for its aggregation. The C termi-
have been proposed, including cell-to-cell transmission of pathologi- nus (residues 96–140) is enriched in acidic residues, is unstructured and
cal α-synuclein, defects in proteostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, is thought to be essential for maintaining α-synuclein solubility. The C
and oxidative and nitrosative stress leading to cell-autonomous and terminus is also the target of diverse post-translational modifications
non-cell-autonomous neuronal death6–9. and metal binding10,11,35,36.
In this Review, we provide an overview of the pivotal discover- Early studies of α-synuclein purified from Escherichia coli or mouse
ies regarding the role of pathological α-synuclein in PD and related tissue under native or denaturing conditions indicated that the protein
α-synucleinopathies. In addition, we review the current understand- exists as natively unfolded monomers that adopt an α-helical second-
ing of the molecular mechanisms of neurodegeneration induced by ary structure only when they bind to lipid vesicles37,38. A study in which
pathological α-synuclein and the current and potential therapeutic endogenous α-synuclein was purified from human erythrocytes under
approaches that target these mechanisms. non-denaturing conditions, however, has indicated that it forms a folded
tetramer of approximately 58%kDa that resists aggregation39,40. Use of
Early characterization of α-synuclein pathology similar methods in further studies of the mouse brain has suggested that
The SNCA gene, which encodes α-synuclein, and the protein itself the predominant native conformation of α-synuclein is a large, unstruc-
were initially identified in a study published in 1988 (ref. 10), which tured monomer with a tendency to aggregate41. Additional evidence has
demonstrated localization of the protein to the nucleus and synapses, suggested that α-synuclein exists as an equilibrium mixture of unstruc-
hence the name synuclein10 (Fig. 1). Initially, in a study published in tured monomers and multimers and that modifications and interactions
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 33

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Fig. 1 | Timeline of key advances in the field of α-synuclein biology and
α-Synuclein is discovered in 1988
synaptic vesicles of Torpedo pathobiology. Timeline of key discoveries since the initial purification
and cloning of α-synuclein. Aβ, amyloid-β; AD, Alzheimer disease; cGAS, cyclic
GMP–AMP synthase; HSPG, heparan sulfate proteoglycan; LAG3, lymphocyte-
1993 α-Synuclein is identified as
the non-Aβ component of activation gene 3 protein; NLRP3, nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich
amyloid plaques in AD repeat-containing family pyrin domain-containing 3; PD, Parkinson disease;
STING, stimulator of interferon genes.
α-Synuclein is found in Lewy 1997 Missense mutation in the
bodies and neurites SNCA gene is found to cause
autosomal dominant PD
α-Synuclein in Lewy bodies and 2002 with lipids, other proteins and small molecules transiently stabilize
neurites is found to be
phosphorylated at Ser129 the different species42–44. Collectively, the evidence has suggested that
α-synuclein has conformational plasticity and structural flexibility that
2003 First proposal of the
hypothesis that pathological is likely to contribute to its different physiological functions45,46.
α-synuclein spreads to the
brain from the olfactory and
Physiological function
Pathological α-synuclein shown 2005 gastrointestinal systems
to induce microglial activation The precise physiological function of α-synuclein remains unclear, but
its predominant expression at presynaptic terminals implies a regula-
2008 Demonstration that tory role within the synapse47. Indeed, β-synuclein, another member
transplanted dopaminergic of the vertebrate-specific synuclein family48, has a similar presynaptic
neurons develop Lewy
bodies in people with PD localization and, although γ-synuclein — the third member of the family —
Demonstration that external 2009 years after transplantation is expressed by glia and only specific neuronal populations49, all three
α-synuclein fibrils are internalized
synucleins seem to support the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
and induce inclusions in neurons
factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) proteins in their role of
2011 Glucocerebrosidase activity mediating synaptic vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release50.
Intrastriatal injections of recombinant and α-synuclein are shown
α-synuclein preformed fibrils cause to form a bidirectional In mice, triple knockout of the synucleins caused an age-dependent
degeneration of dopaminergic pathogenic loop decrease in SNARE complex assembly, suggesting that these proteins
neurons and behavioural deficits 2012
are essential for maintaining normal SNARE complex assembly50.
In line with these observations, evidence has suggested that
α-synuclein has a direct role as a chaperone, similar to cysteine string
Demonstration that HSPGs mediate 2013 Pathological α-synuclein
uptake of pathological α-synuclein strains are shown to have protein-α (CSPα), a synaptic vesicle protein that is recruited to the outer
through micropinocytosis distinct structures, membrane of presynaptic vesicles and contributes to neurotransmitter
neurotoxicity, seeding and
Shown that α-synuclein is tyrosine 2014 transmission properties release51. Deletion of the gene encoding CSPα in mice resulted in a reduc-
phosphorylated by Abelson kinase tion of SNARE complexes and lethal neurodegeneration, but transgenic
expression of α-synuclein restored the levels of the SNARE complex
2015 Pathological α-synuclein and abolished the degenerative phenotype52. In mice that lacked both
strains shown to cause
α-synuclein and CSPα, neurodegeneration was exacerbated52. These
distinct α-synucleinopathies
observations revealed that α-synuclein can complement the function
LAG3 identified as a receptor that 2016 Demonstration that of CSPα as a molecular chaperone. The complex role of α-synuclein in
mediates uptake of pathological phosphorylation of α-synuclein
α-synuclein at Tyr39 generates a exocytosis has been reviewed in detail elsewhere53.
pathogenic form of α-synuclein
Shown that α-synuclein-derived 2017
Involvement in neurodegeneration
peptides act as antigenic epitopes
and drive T cell responses Studies in numerous transgenic mice that express wild-type and
mutant human α-synuclein54 have provided evidence that α-synuclein
Demonstration that pathological 2018 Pathological α-synuclein
α-synuclein induces neuro- shown to activate the NLRP3 is involved in neurodegeneration. Neuronal expression of wild-type
degeneration through parthanatos inflammasome in microglia
α-synuclein results in a relatively modest phenotype with motor impair-
Demonstration that parkin is Demonstration that ment; in some, but not all, cases, inclusions and age-dependent loss
activated by pathological α-synuclein pathological α-synuclein seed of dopaminergic terminals are also observed54. In cultured neurons,
2019 amplification assays can be
modest overexpression of human α-synuclein led to impairments
Anatomical connectivity shown used to detect aggregated
to predict the spread of α-synuclein in biosamples in neurotransmitter release and synaptic vesicle exocytosis55,56, and
pathological α-synuclein similar effects were observed in mouse models that express human
Gut-seeded pathological
α-synuclein shown to spread to α-synuclein, demonstrating that α-synuclein overexpression alters
Pathological α-synuclein shown to 2022 the brain and cause PD-like synaptic physiology57,58. Expression of mutant human α-synuclein
activate the cGAS–STING pathway symptoms
in multiple transgenic mouse models has demonstrated that patho-
logical accumulation of α-synuclein leads to substantial neurode-
The first PET tracer for detection of 2023 Demonstration that seed
pathological α-synuclein is developed amplification assays can generation throughout the nervous system54,59. However, in most of
be used to diagnostically these models, dopaminergic neurons were relatively spared from
distinguish between
A biological definition of neuronal 2024 parkinsonian syndromes neurodegeneration54,59, suggesting that mouse dopaminergic neu-
α-synuclein disease is proposed for caused by pathological rons are resilient to the toxic effects of transgenic overexpression of
parkinsonian disorders α-synuclein α-synuclein.
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 34

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
N-terminal domain NAC domain C-terminal domain
Tyr39 Lys96 Tyr125 Tyr133 Tyr136
Lys12,21,23,32,34 N Lys43,45 Ser87 S Lys102 N Ser129 N N
U U U P U U P U S P P P P
1 61 95 140
Ac
Val15Ala Ala29Ser Glu46Lys Ala53Trp/Glu/Val
Asn103 Asn115,119 Asn12 Tyr133 Tyr135
Gly51Asp
Ala18Thr Ala30Pro
His50Gln
Lys-Thr-Lys-Glu-Gly-Val motif Ac Acetylation U Ubiquitination N Nitration S Sumoylation P Phosphorylation Cleavage
Fig. 2 | Structure of α-synuclein with alterations associated with Parkinson associated with α-synuclein pathology. NAC, non-amyloid-β component of
disease. The schematic shows the primary structure of α-synuclein and sites amyloid plaques.
of point mutations, post-translational modifications and truncations that are
Post-translational modifications with α-synuclein around the Tyr39 residue prevents α-synuclein
α-Synuclein undergoes a number of post-translational modifications. aggregation79, and phosphorylation at Tyr39 impairs these interactions,
These modifications include phosphorylation, nitration, sumoylation, thereby promoting aggregation of α-synuclein and its relocalization to
truncation and ubiquitination60,61 (Fig. 2), all of which are thought to have the mitochondria79. Cryo-electron microscopy has shown that phos-
crucial roles in disruption of the native state of the protein that leads to phorylation at Tyr39 promotes formation of the pY39 α-synuclein fibril
altered binding affinity for itself and/or other proteins, thereby contrib- core, which is associated with PD, supporting the hypothesis that phos-
uting to its aggregation and toxicity60,61. Other post-translational modi- phorylation at Tyr39 has a pathological role72. Furthermore, in mod-
fications of α-synuclein have been described, but their physiological els of α-synuclein-induced neurodegeneration, prevention of Tyr39
and pathophysiological roles have yet to be determined60–62. phosphorylation by deletion of the gene encoding Abelson kinase67,80
or pharmacological inhibition of Abelson kinase is protective81–85, and
Phosphorylation. Phosphorylation is the most common post- increasing the activity of Abelson kinase promotes formation of toxic
translational modification of α-synuclein. Under physiological condi- α-synuclein species and potentiates neurodegeneration67.
tions, phosphorylation of α-synuclein occurs at very low levels (approx-
imately 4% of soluble, monomeric α-synuclein), but phosphorylation at Ubiquitination and sumoylation. Ubiquitinated α-synuclein is
serine residues 87 and 129 (refs. 30,31,63–66) and at tyrosine residues often seen in the Lewy bodies and Lewy neurite inclusions; mono-
39, 125, 133 and 136 (refs. 67–72) is associated with pathological aggrega- ubiquitinated, di-ubiquitinated and tri-ubiquitinated α-synuclein
tion of α-synuclein, suggesting that one or more of these modifications are present in both86,87. Depending on the type of ubiquitin modifica-
are involved in the development of α-synuclein pathology. tion of α-synuclein, it can protect against pathological α-synuclein or
Several lines of evidence indicate that phosphorylation of promote its aggregation. The E3 ubiquitin ligases SIAH-1 and SIAH-2
α-synuclein at Ser129 is important in the development of α-synuclein mono-ubiquitinate α-synuclein at lysine residues 12, 21 and 23, which
pathology. First, phosphorylation of α-synuclein is prominent promotes α-synuclein aggregation88,89. The C-terminal U-box domain
in α-synucleinopathies: more than 90% of α-synuclein aggregates of co-chaperone HSP70-interacting protein (CHIP), which is also an E3
are phosphorylated at Ser129 (refs. 30,31). Moreover, the extent of ubiquitin ligase, also mediates mono-ubiquitination and polyubiquit-
phosphorylation at this site correlates with the likelihood of disease ination of α-synuclein90 to regulate its degradation via the proteasomal
progression30,31,73,74. More directly, phosphorylation of α-synuclein and lysosomal pathways91. Immunoreactivity to CHIP is seen in Lewy
at Ser129 promoted fibril formation30, and in a Drosophila model of bodies, and CHIP overexpression reduces α-synuclein aggregation
PD, phosphorylation at Ser129 led to formation of α-synuclein oli- and increases its degradation91. Polyubiquitination of α-synuclein at
gomers and accelerated neuronal loss75. On the basis of this evidence, lysine residue 63 is mediated by neuronal precursor cell-expressed
phosphorylation of α-synuclein at Ser129 has emerged as a marker developmentally downregulated protein 4 (NEDD4) and promotes
of pathological α-synuclein in PD, although its exact role in driving α-synuclein degradation via the endosomal–lysosomal pathway92.
α-synucleinopathy and neurodegeneration remains unclear76. In addi- Ubiquitination by NEDD4 protects against pathological α-synuclein92.
tion, phosphorylation of Ser129 also has a physiological role in medi- α-Synuclein can also be conjugated to small ubiquitin-like modi-
ating synaptic function through protein–protein interactions77,78, fier (SUMO). The E3 SUMO-protein ligase protein inhibitor of acti-
although only a small fraction of α-synuclein is phosphorylated at vated STATS (PIAS2) sumoylates α-synuclein, causing aggregation of
Ser129 under physiological conditions77,78. α-synuclein that precedes formation of inclusions93.
Evidence also indicates that phosphorylation of α-synuclein at
Tyr39, which is mediated by Abelson kinase, also known as c-Abl67,69, Nitration. α-Synuclein can be nitrated at tyrosine residues 125, 133 and
contributes to PD pathogenesis. The interaction of chaperones 136 in the C terminus and at tyrosine residue 39 in the N terminus94.
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 35

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Nitration of α-synuclein contributes to its aggregation under con- α-Synuclein is widely thought to spread through the nervous
ditions of oxidative and nitrative stress95,96. Nitrated α-synuclein is system via cell-to-cell transmission. According to this hypothesis, mis-
present in brain regions that are affected in α-synucleinopathies95,96 folded α-synuclein can act as a template for conversion of endogenous,
and in α-synuclein transgenic models of PD97. Nitration of α-synuclein monomeric α-synuclein to an abnormal conformation, thereby propa-
accelerates degeneration of dopaminergic neurons by generating gating the pathology intercellularly. The concept initially emerged
robust T cell proliferative and neuroinflammatory responses98,99. Nitra- following observations that grafted fetal mesencephalic dopaminergic
tion (and oxidation) also impairs autophagy-mediated degradation, neurons develop Lewy bodies in the brains of people with PD several
thereby increasing cellular vulnerability to stressors and contributing years after transplantation128–131. Evidence to support the hypothesis
to neuronal degeneration100,101. came from studies that showed that α-synuclein fibrils are internal-
ized and induce formation of α-synuclein inclusions in cell lines and
Truncation. α-Synuclein that is truncated at the C terminus is present primary mouse neurons132–134. Transmission of pathological α-synuclein
in Lewy bodies in people with PD2,102. The C terminus has highly charged pathology in vivo was, to our knowledge, first demonstrated in a study
amino acids that promote disordered protein structure and thereby in which mouse neuronal precursor cells were transplanted into trans-
maintains solubility of the protein103,104. Consequently, C-terminal genic mice that expressed human α-synuclein; the transplanted cells
truncation of α-synuclein promotes its aggregation and drives for- acquired misfolded α-synuclein and α-synuclein inclusions subse-
mation of pathological α-synuclein103,105–108. In transgenic Drosophila quently formed in them132. In subsequent studies, direct injection
and mice that express C-terminally truncated human α-synuclein, the of recombinant α-synuclein preformed fibrils135,136 or pathological
α-synuclein aggregates and causes neurotoxicity109,110. Several enzymes α-synuclein from people with PD into the brains of wild-type mice137
have been implicated in truncation of α-synuclein, including asparagine caused widespread formation of α-synuclein inclusions, resulting in
endopeptidase, calpain-1, caspase-1, neurosin, cathepsin D and matrix neurodegeneration and parkinsonian deficits. Further supporting the
metalloproteinase 3 (refs. 111–117). notion that a prion-like mechanism is involved was the observation
that endogenous α-synuclein is required for cell-to-cell transmission —
Spreading of pathological α-synuclein mice that were deficient for α-synuclein and received injections of
In 2003, Braak et al.118 proposed that pathological α-synuclein spreads α-synuclein preformed fibrils did not develop α-synuclein inclusions
in a stereotypical manner from either the olfactory system or the gastro- or neurobehavioural abnormalities and neurodegeneration did not
intestinal tract (Fig. 1). This hypothesis was based on post-mortem occur123,135. Anatomical connectivity accurately predicts the pattern
examination and localization of Lewy pathology by use of α-synuclein of α-synuclein pathology spreading138–140, but some neuronal popula-
immunostaining118. The findings indicated that deposition of pathologi- tions are spared from α-synuclein toxicity and instead serve as cellular
cal α-synuclein tends to begin in either the anterior olfactory nucleus or conduits for spread along the neural network141.
in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus before spreading into the brain, Initially, α-synuclein was thought to be an intracellular protein,
with Lewy pathology developing in the substantia nigra only in the later but it is now known that monomeric and pathological α-synuclein are
mid-stage of PD pathogenesis118. The observation that Lewy pathology is secreted from cells via unconventional exocytosis142,143. Extracellular
present in the enteric nervous system (ENS) and the PNS in people with α-synuclein is present in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), plasma, saliva, tears,
presymptomatic, incidental Lewy body pathology and subsequently skin and urine in healthy individuals as well as in people with PD144–149.
develops in the midbrain and other regions during disease progression Extracellular pathological α-synuclein can be transferred into cells
of PD led to the suggestion that pathological α-synuclein is transported through various mechanisms. For example, pathological α-synuclein
from the ENS to the CNS via the vagus nerve119,120. In support of this binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), which mediate its
hypothesis, vagotomy in people with peptic ulcer disease markedly uptake via micropinocytosis150. Similarly, lymphocyte-activation gene
reduces the incidence of PD121,122. Similarly, PD-associated behavioural 3 protein (LAG3) acts as a receptor for pathological α-synuclein151,152
and neuropathological findings that develop in mice after injection and works with amyloid-β precursor-like protein 1 (APLP1) to medi-
of preformed fibrils of pathological α-synuclein into the pylorus and ate most neuronal endocytosis of pathological α-synuclein151. LAG3
duodenum are attenuated by vagotomy123. and APLP1 are expressed on other cell types and neurons, suggesting
Evidence in the past 5 years, however, has given rise to the notion that they could mediate uptake of pathological α-synuclein beyond
that PD can be categorized as either body-first PD, in which the pathol- neurons151. Toll-like receptor 2 is known to have a role in the uptake
ogy first develops in the gastrointestinal tract and spreads to the CNS as of pathological α-synuclein into microglia153,154. Various other trans-
described above, or brain-first PD, in which the pathology first develops membrane proteins, including the Na+–K+ ATPase155, neurexins152,155,156,
in the brain and spreads down the neural axis (Fig. 3). Rapid eye move- cellular prion protein157–161, FcγRIIB receptor162, LRP1 (ref. 163) and
ment (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is considered a prodromal GPNMB164, also bind to fibrillar and/or oligomeric forms of α-synuclein,
symptom of body-first PD, as it strongly predicts development of PD suggesting that they could be involved in its cellular uptake. How-
but precedes motor symptoms124, and use of multimodal imaging has ever, future studies are needed to determine their roles and whether
shown that deficits in sympathetic and parasympathetic imaging pre- they mediate uptake into specific cell types and of specific strains of
cede dopaminergic deficits in RBD-positive (body-first) PD, whereas pathological α-synuclein (see the section ‘Disease-specific α-synuclein
dopaminergic deficits preceded the sympathetic and parasympathetic strains’).
imaging abnormalities in RBD-negative (brain-first) PD125 (Fig. 3). This The mechanisms that follow cellular uptake of pathologi-
observation demonstrates that the pattern of pathological spreading cal α-synuclein and lead to misfolding of endogenous, unfolded
differs between the two subtypes, and neuropathological evidence fur- α-synuclein are poorly understood. Some preliminary evidence indi-
ther supports the notion of body-first and brain-first PD126. Exposure, cates that fibrils exit endosomes via endolysosomal perforation165.
and routes of exposure, to various environmental toxicants could drive The mechanism by which pathological α-synuclein is released
the development of body-first or brain-first PD127. from cells is also not well understood, although exosomal release166,167,
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 36

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Body-first PD Brain-first PD
Substantia nigra Substantia nigra
FDOPA ↓↓ FDOPA ↓↓
Parkinsonism Parkinsonism
Limbic system
4 5 2 1 Amygdala
and amygdala
Locus coeruleus Locus coeruleus
Neuromelanin ↓↓ 3 Neuromelanin ↓ 3
RBD No RBD
2 4
Dorsal motor nucleus Dorsal motor nucleus
Donepezil PET ↓↓ Donepezil PET normal
Heart Heart
Stellate ganglion 2 2 Stellate ganglion 5 5
MIBG ↓↓ MIBG normal
Coeliac ganglion 2 Coeliac ganglion 5
Vagal pathway Vagal pathway
Sympathetic pathway Sympathetic pathway
Intestine
1 4
Fig. 3 | Characteristics of body-first and brain-first Parkinson disease. The (right), α-synuclein pathology begins in susceptible brain structures, such as the
arrows and numbers illustrate the progression of α-synuclein pathology. The boxes limbic system, or enters through the olfactory pathway before spreading down
highlight the expected imaging findings and symptoms at the onset of motor the brainstem. RBD and dysautonomia typically manifest after onset of
symptoms. In the body-first subtype (left), α-synuclein initially aggregates in the parkinsonism. As the disease progresses, widespread pathology develops across
gut before spreading through the autonomic nervous system to the spinal cord these systems in nearly all individuals, leading to converging symptoms. FDOPA,
and brainstem. Prodromal signs include autonomic dysfunction and rapid eye fluorodopa; MIBG, meta-iodobenzylguanidine scan; PD, Parkinson disease. Figure
movement sleep behaviour disorder (RBD). Conversely, in the brain-first subtype adapted with permission from ref. 125, Oxford University Press.
direct cellular membrane penetration168 and tunnelling nanotubes169,170 it from the α-synuclein strains found in other α-synucleinopathies179.
all contribute to the transfer of pathological α-synuclein between cells. Distinct strains may even be present in brain-first and body-first PD180.
The biophysical and biological features of the different pathologi-
Disease-specific α-synuclein strains cal α-synuclein conformations could be driving the different clinical
Different conformations of pathological α-synuclein aggregates, manifestations and neuropathologies of the α-synucleinopathies.
referred to as strains, seem to drive the pathogenesis and clinical mani-
festations of the different α-synucleinopathies. The concept of strains α-Synuclein detection methods
derives from prion disease, in which distinct pathology, seeding and Development of new methods to detect pathological α-synuclein spe-
transmission of prions and distinct clinical symptoms are attributed cies in biospecimens from people with α-synucleinopathies using seed
to conformational differences between prion strains171. Pathological amplification assays (SAAs) and to detect α-synuclein aggregation via
α-synuclein strains generated in vitro by repetitive seeded fibrillization brain imaging will improve the diagnosis of these diseases and monitor-
under different conditions have distinct structures, neurotoxicity, and ing of their progression. These methods are still in the early stages of
seeding and transmission properties172,173. Furthermore, pathological development and validation, but hold great promise not only for diag-
α-synuclein strains derived from people with PD, MSA and DLB have nosis and monitoring but also for providing a deeper understanding
different biophysical and biological properties, including seeding pro- of the pathophysiology of α-synucleinopathies.
pensity, resulting α-synuclein pathology and neurotoxicity174–176. These
strains also have distinct structures as determined by nuclear magnetic Seed amplification assays
resonance and cryo-electron microscopy177,178. In MSA, the cellular milieu SAAs — protein misfolding cyclic amplification and real-time
of oligodendrocytes drives the formation of pathological α-synuclein quaking-induced conversion — exploit the ability of pathological
with distinct conformational and biological properties, differentiating α-synuclein species to propagate to multiply them in vitro, thereby
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 37

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Immune system Inhibition
activation
Non-cell-autonomous pathogenic mechanisms
Cell-autonomous pathogenic mechanisms
GLP-1 receptor Inhibitors of
agonists microglia activation
α-Synuclein
reduction
Pathological
α-synuclein ↑ TNF
Microglia Neurotoxic reactive
immunotherapy ↑ IL-1α
activation astrocytes
↑ C1q
α-Synuclein
aggregation
inhibitors
cGAS inhibitors
α-Synuclein
mutations
↑ cGAS ↑ STING ↑ Interferon response
Autosomal
dominant
Parkinson
disease
NLRP3 inhibitors
LAG3
inhibitors
Cell-to-cell Inflammasome
transmission ↑ NLRP3 activation ↑ ASC ↑ Caspase-1 ↑ IL-1β
LAG3
• Parkinson
disease
(sporadic) Pathological mTORC1 inhibitors Irisin
• Age α-Synuclein α-synuclein TSC1
• Nitrative
aggregation
oxidative TSC1
stress TSC2 TSC2 ↑ mTORC1 Endolysosomal dysfunction
• GBA
mutations
Abnormal protein translation
α-Synuclein
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
MIF nuclease
GBA
PARP inhibitors inhibitors
modulators
c-Abl ↑ AIMP2 ↑ PARP1 PAR AIF MIF
inhibitors
Nitrative
oxidative Cell death
↑ c-Abl ↑ Parkin ↓ Parkin
stress
pY143
↑ PARIS ↓ PGC-1α ↓ NRF-1
Phosphorylated
α-synuclein Parkin or PINK1 PARIS
activators inhibitors
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
NLRP3
inhibitors
Inflammasome
↑ NLRP3 activation ↑ ASC ↑ Caspase-1
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 38

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
Fig. 4 | Pathways of α-synuclein-related neurodegeneration and possible synthase; C1q, complement component 1q; GBA, glucosylceramidase β1; GLP-1,
interventions. Multiple factors contribute to the generation of pathological glucagon-like peptide 1; LAG3, lymphocyte-activation gene 3 protein; MIF,
α-synuclein aggregates (left). Formation of these aggregates leads to activation macrophage migration inhibitory factor; mTORC1, mTOR complex 1;
of non-cell-autonomous pathogenic mechanisms, which involve innate NLRP3, nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat-containing family pyrin
and adaptive immunity, and cell-autonomous pathogenic mechanisms of domain-containing 3; NRF1, nuclear respiratory factor 1; PAR, poly(ADP-ribose);
neurodegeneration. Therapeutic interventions are represented by grey boxes. PARIS, parkin-interacting substrate; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase;
AIF, apoptosis-inducing factor; AIMP2, aminoacyl tRNA synthetase complex- PGC-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α; STING,
interacting multifunctional protein 2; ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-like stimulator of interferon genes; TNF, tumour necrosis factor; TSC, tuberous
protein containing a CARD; c-Abl, Abelson kinase; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP sclerosis protein.
enabling detection of small amounts in biological samples181,182. Pro- and DLB, and the signal density correlates with the severity of motor
tein misfolding cyclic amplification enables detection of aggregated symptoms in PD. Future research needs to focus on their clinical utility.
α-synuclein in biosamples174,183 and can discriminate PD from MSA with In addition, the differences in conformation and biophysical properties
high sensitivity184. The real-time quaking-induced conversion assay of different α-synuclein strains raise the possibility that radioligands
enables real-time monitoring of the kinetics of pathological α-synuclein could be developed to differentiate between the α-synucleinopathies.
aggregation and can also be used to study the biophysical properties
of pathological α-synuclein strains181. Targeting pathological mechanisms
Use of SAAs will facilitate development of biological definitions of in α-synucleinopathies
α-synucleinopathies and will facilitate observational and interventional Many points in the cascade of pathological α-synuclein-induced
disease-modifying trials in parkinsonian disorders185. However, these neurodegeneration could be targeted to treat PD and other
assays also have great diagnostic potential, and the ability to detect α-synucleinopathies (Fig. 4), from preventing its misfolding and aggre-
pathological α-synuclein in the serum provides the opportunity to gation to enhancing clearance mechanisms and inhibiting downstream
develop powerful blood-based diagnostic assays186. SAAs can distin- toxic effects. In this section, we highlight potential intervention points
guish parkinsonian syndromes that involve α-synuclein pathology that could reshape treatment strategies for PD and related disorders.
from those with other causes with sensitivities and specificities of
more than 90%187–189. Among people with newly diagnosed PD, SAA α-Synuclein aggregation
analysis of the CSF has a diagnostic sensitivity of 82.6% and a specific- The most fundamental target in α-synucleinopathies is α-synuclein
ity of 88.2%186. In the prodromal phase of PD, use of SAAs identifies itself. One possible strategy is to reduce the expression of α-synuclein by
pathological α-synuclein in the CSF189 and in extracellular vesicles in use of small hairpin RNA, small interfering RNA or antisense oligonucle-
the blood190. Indeed, SAAs have detected pathological α-synuclein otides (ASOs) to reduce the expression of SCNA mRNA200–202. Consistent
in the CSF191, serum192, olfactory mucosa, skin, saliva193 and other with this strategy, use of ASOs to target α-synuclein in a mouse model of
biospecimens194, providing multiple opportunities to study strains of PD in which mice express human α-synuclein reduced neuropathology
pathological α-synuclein and to develop diagnostic platforms. To date, and early behavioural deficits203,204. Other approaches to reducing levels
use of skin and CSF samples with SAAs results in the greatest diagnostic of α-synuclein should be considered, such as viral vector delivery of
accuracy195. Kinetic analysis of SAA profiles, such as determining thi- α-synuclein CRISPR–Cas9 or RNAi205. However, the effects of knocking
oflavin maximal fluorescence intensity, lag time and the time at which down α-synuclein after development are not known, so caution is war-
aggregation is 50% complete, has the potential to enable differentia- ranted as reducing levels of α-synuclein could be associated with unin-
tion of PD, DLB, MSA188 and cognitive decline in PD16,196. Determining tended toxicity. Beyond reducing expression of α-synuclein, inhibiting
whether SAAs can be used in clinical practice to reliably differentiate its aggregation could be an alternative approach to stopping the devel-
PD, DLB and MSA and to monitor disease progression and response to opment of pathology (Fig. 4). In models of α-synucleinopathies, includ-
therapeutic disease-modifying therapies will be important. ing transgenic human A30P α-synucleinopathy and a transgenic mouse
model of MSA, administration of anle138b (3-(1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)-
PET imaging 5-(3bromophenyl)-1H-pyrazole) prevents formation of pathological
The development of radiopharmaceuticals for PET imaging of α-synuclein aggregates and protects against motor deficits206–210. Simi-
pathological α-synuclein could transform the diagnosis and treat- larly, administration of NPT100-18a to α-synuclein–GFP transgenic mice
ment of α-synucleinopathies by enabling earlier and more accurate interferes with interactions of α-synuclein with membranes, reduces
diagnoses, monitoring of disease progression. PET imaging find- α-synuclein aggregation and protects against neurodegeneration211.
ings could also serve as an outcome measure in clinical trials. PET Some agents that block α-synuclein aggregation are in preclinical
ligands that are currently in development for imaging of pathological or clinical trials for the treatment of PD212,213. The current status of
α-synuclein seem to have good selectivity for α-synuclein aggregates α-synuclein-based therapies and other disease-modifying treatments
in models of α-synucleinopathies and in people with PD and related for PD has been reviewed in full elsewhere214.
α-synucleinopathies197–199. For example, the F0502B PET tracer binds to An alternative strategy for targeting pathological α-synuclein is
α-synuclein with high affinity and recognizes aggregated α-synuclein immunization to remove aggregates that are already present215,216 (Fig. 4).
in brain tissue from mice, non-human primates and humans with PD199. In transgenic mouse models of α-synucleinopathies, active immun-
The ACI-12589 PET tracer shows specificity for pathological α-synuclein ization (which stimulates the immune system) and passive immuniza-
in tissue from people with PD and MSA, and binding in the brains of liv- tion (direct antibody administration) have reduced neuropathology
ing people with MSA has been demonstrated198. The C05-05 PET tracer and neurobehavioural deficits217–220. Immunization could also pre-
enables visualization of α-synuclein aggregates in living people with PD vent cell-to-cell transfer of pathological α-synuclein (Fig. 4), and the
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 39

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
same principle could be used to prevent pathological α-synuclein from its immunosuppressive effects and its off-target effects243, but develop-
binding to its transmembrane receptors (Fig. 4). Indeed, in the striatal ment of brain-penetrant mTORC1 inhibitors could have potential for
pathological α-synuclein preformed fibril model of PD, passive immun- the treatment of PD and related α-synucleinopathies.
ization with LAG3 antibodies reduced neuropathology and neuro- Impairment of α-synuclein degradation is a key mechanism in
behavioural deficits151,152. Further studies are needed to explore the PD associated with mutations in GBA, which encodes the lysosomal
potential of interfering with cell-to-cell transmission of pathological enzyme glucocerebrosidase244,245. Mutations in GBA account for 5–15%
α-synuclein in this way. of PD cases, making it one of the most important risk factors246. The
Despite success with passive and active immunization in animal reduction of glucocerebrosidase activity that results from the muta-
models, passive immunization failed to alter the disease course in tion leads to accumulation of pathological α-synuclein247. In animal
people with PD in the first two clinical trials221,222. However, post-hoc models of α-synuclein-induced neurodegeneration, treatment with
analysis of results from one of these trials has suggested that the mono- GBA gene therapy, glucocerebrosidase enzyme replacement therapy,
clonal antibody prasinezumab, which targets aggregated α-synuclein, glucocerebrosidase substrate reduction therapy and glucocerebro-
slows motor progression in people with rapidly progressing PD223. sidase chaperones has been beneficial246 (Fig. 4). Several studies of
Confirmation of this observation requires additional randomized therapies that target GBA and/or glucocerebrosidase are ongoing248 to
clinical trials. In addition, the immunization approach might need to determine the best treatment strategy for this form of PD246.
be optimized; for example, monoclonal antibodies that are specific
to defined pathological α-synuclein strains might be needed to realize Cell-autonomous neuronal death
the potential of this approach. Emerging evidence indicates that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1
Another approach to removing α-synuclein pathology that (PARP1)-dependent cell death — also known as parthanatos — is the
has already formed is to promote its degradation. Degradation of main cell death pathway by which pathological α-synuclein induces
α-synuclein occurs via the ubiquitin–proteasome system and the neurodegeneration249 (Fig. 4). First, genetic depletion or pharmacologi-
autophagy–lysosome pathway224; the ubiquitin–proteasome sys- cal inhibition of PARP1 prevents pathological α-synuclein-induced cell
tem seems to be the main degradation pathway for non-pathological death in primary neuronal cultures, and prevents neurodegenera-
α-synuclein, whereas the autophagy–lysosome pathway seems to be tion and behavioural deficits in mouse models of sporadic and genetic
the major pathway of degradation of pathological α-synuclein225–227. α-synucleinopathies250,251 (Fig. 4). Second, apoptosis-inducing factor
Impairment of these clearance mechanisms can lead to increased intra- (AIF), which is a key mediator of parthanatos, is translocated to the
cellular pathological α-synuclein aggregates228. Therefore, strategies nucleus in the ventral mesencephalon of people with PD252. Finally,
that increase degradation of α-synuclein aggregates, such as tagging genetic knockout or selective inhibition of macrophage migration
aggregates for degradation229, or promoting macroautophagy230 and inhibitory factor (MIF) nuclease, which is crucial for parthanatos253,
chaperone-mediated autophagy231,232, offer opportunities to reduce prevented neurodegeneration and behavioural deficits in two orthogo-
the burden of pathological α-synuclein (Fig. 4). nal pathological α-synuclein models of dopaminergic cell loss and in
Promotion of α-synuclein degradation seems to be one mecha- the MPTP intoxication model of PD254 (Fig. 4).
nism that contributes to the benefits of physical exercise, and parti- Initiation of the parthanatic death cascade involves nitrative
cularly endurance exercise and training, in PD. Endurance exercise and oxidative stress that is triggered by pathological α-synuclein
and training have been shown to reduce the risk of developing PD, aggregates250 and exacerbated by disruption to mitochondrial func-
improve the efficacy of symptomatic medication and improve qual- tion by pathological α-synuclein aggregates255. This nitrative and oxida-
ity of life233–235. Administration of the myokine irisin, which is released tive stress leads to DNA damage that activates the DNA sensor PARP1,
from the muscles during exercise, has been shown to be beneficial in which increases the levels of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR), thereby setting
the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) intoxication the cascade in motion256 (Fig. 4). PAR binds to hexokinase 1 on the mito-
model of PD236,237 and the intrastriatal α-synuclein preformed fibril chondria, driving mitochondrial dysfunction through impairment of
mouse model of sporadic PD238, suggesting that the benefits of exercise glycolysis257–259 (Fig. 4). The nitrative and oxidative stress also activates
could be mediated, at least in part, by irisin. In mice, the benefits of irisin the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Abelson kinase, which phosphorylates
seemed to result from increased autophagy–lysosome degradation of α-synuclein at the Tyr39 residue, thereby generating a pathogenic form
pathological α-synuclein238 (Fig. 4). of α-synuclein that further contributes to pathological α-synuclein
One possible drug target to promote macroautophagy of aggregation67 (Fig. 4). The E3-ubiquitin ligase parkin is also phospho-
α-synuclein aggregates is mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), rylated by Abelson kinase, and its ubiquitination activity is conse-
which is a key regulator of cellular metabolism, autophagy and protein quently inhibited260, leading to the accumulation of aminoacyl tRNA
translation239. Pathological α-synuclein binds to tuberous sclerosis synthetase complex-interacting multifunctional protein 2 (AIMP2),
protein 2 (TSC2), which destabilizes the TSC1–TSC2 complex and parkin-interacting substrate (PARIS) and nucleotide-binding domain
activates mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1). Activation of mTORC1 increases leucine-rich repeat-containing family pyrin domain-containing 3
mRNA translation and contributes to neurodegeneration induced (NLRP3)80,261, all of which lead to increased cell death by parthanatos or
by pathological α-synuclein240 (Fig. 4). Thus, selective inhibitors of inflammasone activation (Fig. 4).
mTORC1 could be used both to increase macroautophagy-mediated The impairment of parkin activity in sporadic PD suggests that
clearance of α-synuclein aggregates and to rectify the mRNA dys- activators of parkin or PINK1, which itself activates parkin, could be
regulation that occurs in PD. Indeed, in an α-synuclein preformed used to treat PD262 (Fig. 4). In multiple models of PD, inhibitors of Abel-
fibril mouse model of PD, the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin has been son kinase prevent neurodegeneration67,80,81,83,85,263–265 (Fig. 4), although
shown to promote clearance of pathological α-synuclein aggregates two clinical trials of the Abelson kinase inhibitor nilonitib failed owing
and reduce mRNA dysregulation225,240–242. Rapamycin itself is unlikely to poor brain penetrance266,267. Trials of Abelson kinase inhibitors with
to be a good drug candidate in PD owing to its poor brain penetration, better brain penetration are in progress268, but their CNS penetration
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 40

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
is still limited and off-target effects could limit their clinical utility. decreases the clearance of pathological α-synuclein in culture and
Allosteric inhibitors of Abelson kinase, for example, neurotinib, hold in A53T α-synuclein transgenic mice310. The response of microglia
particular promise because off-target effects are minimized and brain to pathological α-synuclein is regulated by Fyn kinase activity and
penetrance is superior269. the class B scavenger receptor CD36 (ref. 311). Ultimately, activation
Targeting the downstream effects of parkin impairment could of NF-κB pathways in microglia seems to be central to the inflam-
be an alternative therapeutic strategy to reduce parthanatos. AIMP2 matory response300,306,311, but other transmembrane receptors
directly activates PARP1 (refs. 270,271) (Fig. 4). Accumulation of that bind to pathological α-synuclein also have roles in microglial
PARIS leads to mitochondrial dysfunction272–274, and AIMP2 levels are activation281.
increased downstream of PARIS accumulation — AIMP2 levels do not Pathological α-synuclein induces release of IL-1β from microglia
increase in response to pathological α-synuclein in mice with a knock- via priming and activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome311 (Fig. 4).
out of the gene encoding PARIS, indicating that the increase in AIMP2 NLRP3 and downstream ACS and IL-1β are all elevated in people with
levels is downstream in the PARIS pathogenesis cascade80 (Fig. 4). In PD312, providing support for the need to evaluate NLRP3 inhibition
multiple models of PD, genetically reducing levels of PARIS or pharma- as a disease-modifying therapy in PD. Pathological α-synuclein also
cological inhibition of PARIS is protective80,273,275–277 (Fig. 4). Similarly, activates the cyclic GMP–AMP synthase–stimulator of interferon
accumulation of NLRP3 leads to activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome genes (cGAS–STING)-dependent interferon response, leading to
activation, and downstream accumulation of apoptosis-associated neurodegeneration313,314 (Fig. 4); this mechanism raises the prospect
speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) accumulation and acti- of cGAS inhibitors as a disease-modifying therapeutic approach
vation of caspase-1 (ref. 278). This pathway is also dependent on in PD315 (Fig. 4). IL-6 released from α-synuclein-activated microglia
PARIS-induced mitochondrial dysfunction261 (Fig. 4). In models of PD, induces dysregulation of neuronal iron uptake, leading to toxic
NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitors are also neuroprotective279,280. neuronal iron accumulation316. Some evidence has suggested that
pathological α-synuclein also stimulates microglial cytokine secre-
Non-cell-autonomous neuronal death tion and reactive oxygen species production, leading to activation of
Adaptive immunity. Adaptive immunity is known to have a role in mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways that contribute to
PD99,281, and some evidence has suggested that α-synuclein-derived neurodegeneration303,317–319. Microglia also play a part in the spread of
peptides act as antigens that are recognized by T cells282 (Fig. 4). pathological α-synuclein281.
Furthermore, CD8+ and CD4+ T cells have been observed in the Astrocytes also have a role in the innate immune response to
substantia nigra of post-mortem brains of people with PD283,284. pathological α-synuclein. Pathological α-synuclein can be transmit-
Genome-wide association studies have indicated that the major ted from neurons to astrocytes320, and inclusions of α-synuclein are
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II alleles HLA-DRB5*01 and present in astrocytes in post-mortem brains of people with PD321,322.
HLA-DRB1*15:01 are associated with PD285,286, and that the non-HLA Astrocytes produce multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines, includ-
genes in the MHC class III region are also associated with an increased ing IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-18, tumour necrosis factor (TNF), chemotactic
risk of PD287. In mouse models of PD, targeted overexpression of cytokines, and CC, CXC and CXCL chemokines320,323. In addition, the
human α-synuclein leads to microglial activation and an adaptive profile of growth factors that astrocytes produce and secrete changes
immune response288, and CD4+ T cells mediate brain inflammation in response to pathological α-synuclein324. These pro-inflammatory
and neurodegeneration289. Expression of MHC class I molecules in cat- responses in astrocytes are dependent on TLR4, whereas this receptor
echolaminergic neurons also makes them vulnerable to T cell-induced does not seem to be required for uptake of pathological α-synuclein
degeneration290. Some evidence has also suggested that the adaptive into astrocytes325,326.
immune system is involved in other α-synucleinopathies291,292. This Besides neuroinflammation induced by astrocytic accumula-
evidence has suggested that modulation of adaptive immunity could, tion of pathological α-synuclein, reactive astrogliosis contributes
therefore, form the basis of disease-modifying therapy for PD and to neurodegeneration and neurotoxicity. In cultures, treatment
related α-synucleinopathies. of astrocytes with pathological α-synuclein or its overexpression
in astrocytes leads to neuronal and astrocytic Ca2+ flux, oxidative stress
Innate immunity. Pathological α-synuclein induces microglial and astrocytic reductions in cholesterol327,328, presumably leading
activation293,294 (Fig. 4) — microgliosis is widely observed in rodent to neurotoxicity. Selective expression of A53T α-synuclein in mouse
and non-human primate models of pathological α-synuclein-induced astrocytes led to astrocytic dysfunction in glutamate uptake and
degeneration295–300 and in the substantia nigra in post-mortem brains alterations in the blood–brain barrier, and induced microglial acti-
from people with PD301,302. Pathological α-synuclein can also activate vation in the midbrain, brainstem and spinal cord, suggesting that
myeloid cells in the periphery303,304. inflammatory responses elicited by reactive astrocytes contribute
Microglial activation and pro-inflammatory responses to patho- to non-cell-autonomous neurodegeneration329. Furthermore, IL-1α,
logical α-synuclein are initiated, in part, by uptake of extracellular TNF and complement component 1q (C1q) released from activated
pathological α-synuclein305. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are activated microglia in response to α-synuclein drive the formation of neurotoxic
by pathological α-synuclein and contribute to neuroinflammation306. reactive astrocytes300,330 (Fig. 4), which induce cell death, in part, via
Expression of TLR2 and TLR4 is higher among people with PD saturated lipids331. Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists
than among healthy individuals306. However, activation of TLRs in inhibit the release of IL-1α, TNF and C1q from activated microglia,
α-synucleinopathies can have protective and deleterious effects306; thereby reducing numbers of neurotoxic reactive astrocytes300 (Fig. 4).
antagonism of TLR2 attenuates pathological α-synuclein-induced Consequently, GLP-1 receptor agonists are neuroprotective because
neurodegeneration307,308, whereas activation of TLR4 clears α-synuclein (among other mechanisms332) they prevent microglial reactivity and
aggregates309. Pathological α-synuclein also binds to microglial Fcγ formation of neurotoxic reactive astrocytes300 (Fig. 4). Epidemiological
receptor IIb, which in turn inhibits microglial phagocytosis and studies have indicated that GLP-1 receptor agonists, which are used for
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 41

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
the treatment of obesity and diabetes mellitus type 2, lower the inci- 12. Twohig, D. & Nielsen, H. M. α-Synuclein in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease.
dence of PD333. In clinical studies, the GLP-1 receptor agonist exenatide Mol. Neurodegener. 14, 23 (2019).
13. Polymeropoulos, M. H. et al. Mutation in the α-synuclein gene identified in families with
slowed the progression of PD334,335, and lixisenatide slowed the progres- Parkinson’s disease. Science 276, 2045–2047 (1997).
sion of early-stage PD in people receiving stable anti-symptomatic 14. Appel-Cresswell, S. et al. α-Synuclein p.H50Q, a novel pathogenic mutation for
treatment for PD336. A 36-week clinical trial of the brain-penetrant GLP-1 Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 28, 811–813 (2013).
15. Daida, K. et al. α-Synuclein V15A variant in familial Parkinson’s disease exhibits a weaker
receptor agonist NLY01 failed to meet its global trial end points, but lipid-binding property. Mov. Disord. 37, 2075–2085 (2022).
pre-specified analysis has shown that PD progression was slowed sub- 16. Gadhave, K. et al. α-Synuclein strain dynamics correlate with cognitive shifts in
stantially in people under 60 years of age337. The benefits of exenatide338 Parkinson’s disease. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.22.619694
(2024).
and lixisenatide were also greatest in people under 60 years of age336. 17. Hoffman-Zacharska, D. et al. Novel A18T and pA29S substitutions in α-synuclein may be
Together, these studies support future clinical trials of GLP-1 receptor associated with sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 19, 1057–1060
(2013).
agonists in PD; trials in people under 60 years of age that last for more
18. Kruger, R. et al. Ala30Pro mutation in the gene encoding α-synuclein in Parkinson’s
than 12 months are most likely to demonstrate benefits338,339. disease. Nat. Genet. 18, 106–108 (1998).
19. Lesage, S. et al. G51D α-synuclein mutation causes a novel parkinsonian-pyramidal
Conclusions and perspectives syndrome. Ann. Neurol. 73, 459–471 (2013).
20. Pasanen, P. et al. Novel α-synuclein mutation A53E associated with atypical multiple
Extensive studies to understand the physiological and pathological role system atrophy and Parkinson’s disease-type pathology. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 2180.
of α-synuclein started in 1997, when a mutation in SNCA was discovered e1–2180.e5 (2014).
21. Yoshino, H. et al. Homozygous α-synuclein p.A53V in familial Parkinson’s disease.
as a genetic cause of PD. Distinct pathological mechanisms of degenera-
Neurobiol. Aging 57, 248.e7–248.e12 (2017).
tion induced by pathological α-synuclein, including cell-autonomous 22. Zarranz, J. J. et al. The new mutation, E46K, of α-synuclein causes Parkinson and Lewy
and non-cell-autonomous mechanisms, are giving rise to a spectrum body dementia. Ann. Neurol. 55, 164–173 (2004).
23. Chartier-Harlin, M. C. et al. α-Synuclein locus duplication as a cause of familial
of preclinical validation studies and disease-modifying clinical tri-
Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 364, 1167–1169 (2004).
als in humans with PD. Insights into the role of innate and adaptive 24. Singleton, A. B. et al. α-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science
immunity have opened up new therapeutic opportunities for dis- 302, 841 (2003).
25. Lee, V. M. & Trojanowski, J. Q. Mechanisms of Parkinson’s disease linked to pathological
ease modification in PD. Understanding of cell-to-cell transmission α-synuclein: new targets for drug discovery. Neuron 52, 33–38 (2006).
mechanisms, disease-specific strains of pathological α-synuclein 26. McNaught, K. S. & Olanow, C. W. Protein aggregation in the pathogenesis of familial and
and the development of biomarkers based on SSAs and PET imaging sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 27, 530–545 (2006).
27. Spillantini, M. G., Crowther, R. A., Jakes, R., Hasegawa, M. & Goedert, M. α-Synuclein in
are changing the landscape of basic research and clinical practice in filamentous inclusions of Lewy bodies from Parkinson’s disease and dementia with lewy
this area. Further studies are required to identify the origins of dif- bodies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6469–6473 (1998).
28. Mezey, E. et al. α-Synuclein in neurodegenerative disorders: murderer or accomplice?
ferent pathological α-synuclein strains and how they lead to distinct
Nat. Med. 4, 755–757 (1998).
α-synucleinopathies. Methods that enable reliable distinction between 29. Galvin, J. E., Giasson, B., Hurtig, H. I., Lee, V. M. & Trojanowski, J. Q. Neurodegeneration
the α-synucleinopathies will guide future clinical studies, and neuro- with brain iron accumulation, type 1 is characterized by α-, β-, and &-synuclein
neuropathology. Am. J. Pathol. 157, 361–368 (2000).
imaging agents that enable monitoring of α-synuclein pathology and
30. Fujiwara, H. et al. α-Synuclein is phosphorylated in synucleinopathy lesions. Nat. Cell.
responses to therapy will be crucial to validate disease-modifying thera- Biol. 4, 160–164 (2002).
pies. Furthermore, PET imaging and SAAs could enable identification 31. Anderson, J. P. et al. Phosphorylation of Ser-129 is the dominant pathological
modification of α-synuclein in familial and sporadic Lewy body disease. J. Biol. Chem.
of individuals who are asymptomatic but at risk of α-synucleinopathies
281, 29739–29752 (2006).
early in the disease course, when disease-modifying therapies could be 32. Shahmoradian, S. H. et al. Lewy pathology in Parkinson’s disease consists of crowded
implemented before disease manifestation340. PET imaging and SAAs organelles and lipid membranes. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1099–1109 (2019).
33. Trinkaus, V. A. et al. In situ architecture of neuronal α-Synuclein inclusions. Nat. Commun.
could also be used to biologically stage α-synucleinopathies, thereby
12, 2110 (2021).
further facilitating drug intervention trials. 34. Kahle, P. J. α-Synucleinopathy models and human neuropathology: similarities and
differences. Acta Neuropathol. 115, 87–95 (2008).
35. Giasson, B. I., Murray, I. V., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. A hydrophobic stretch of
Published online: 28 November 2024
12 amino acid residues in the middle of α-synuclein is essential for filament assembly.
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 2380–2386 (2001).
References
36. Maroteaux, L. & Scheller, R. H. The rat brain synucleins; family of proteins transiently
1. Goedert, M. & Spillantini, M. G. Lewy body diseases and multiple system atrophy as associated with neuronal membrane. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 11, 335–343 (1991).
α-synucleinopathies. Mol. Psychiatry 3, 462–465 (1998). 37. Davidson, W. S., Jonas, A., Clayton, D. F. & George, J. M. Stabilization of α-synuclein
2. Baba, M. et al. Aggregation of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies of sporadic Parkinson’s disease secondary structure upon binding to synthetic membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 273,
and dementia with Lewy bodies. Am. J. Pathol. 152, 879–884 (1998). 9443–9449 (1998).
3. Wakabayashi, K., Yoshimoto, M., Tsuji, S. & Takahashi, H. α-Synuclein immunoreactivity 38. Weinreb, P. H., Zhen, W., Poon, A. W., Conway, K. A. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. NACP, a protein
in glial cytoplasmic inclusions in multiple system atrophy. Neurosci. Lett. 249, 180–182 implicated in Alzheimer’s disease and learning, is natively unfolded. Biochemistry 35,
(1998). 13709–13715 (1996).
4. Hamilton, R. L. Lewy bodies in Alzheimer’s disease: a neuropathological review of 39. Bartels, T., Choi, J. G. & Selkoe, D. J. α-Synuclein occurs physiologically as a helically
145 cases using α-synuclein immunohistochemistry. Brain Pathol. 10, 378–384 (2000). folded tetramer that resists aggregation. Nature 477, 107–110 (2011).
5. Spillantini, M. G. et al. α-Synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 388, 839–840 (1997). 40. Wang, W. et al. A soluble α-synuclein construct forms a dynamic tetramer. Proc. Natl
6. Bi, M., Du, X., Jiao, Q., Chen, X. & Jiang, H. Expanding the role of proteasome homeostasis Acad. Sci. USA 108, 17797–17802 (2011).
in Parkinson’s disease: beyond protein breakdown. Cell Death Dis. 12, 154 (2021). 41. Burre, J. et al. Properties of native brain α-synuclein. Nature 498, E4–E6 (2013).
7. Peng, C., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Lee, V. M. Protein transmission in neurodegenerative 42. Buell, A. K. et al. Solution conditions determine the relative importance of nucleation and
disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16, 199–212 (2020). growth processes in α-synuclein aggregation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 7671–7676
8. Sohrabi, T. et al. Common mechanisms underlying α-synuclein-induced mitochondrial (2014).
dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease. J. Mol. Biol. 435, 167992 (2023). 43. Gould, N. et al. Evidence of native α-synuclein conformers in the human brain.
9. Stykel, M. G. & Ryan, S. D. Nitrosative stress in Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 8, J. Biol. Chem. 289, 7929–7934 (2014).
104 (2022). 44. Theillet, F. X. et al. Structural disorder of monomeric α-synuclein persists in
10. Maroteaux, L., Campanelli, J. T. & Scheller, R. H. Synuclein: a neuron-specific protein mammalian cells. Nature 530, 45–50 (2016).
localized to the nucleus and presynaptic nerve terminal. J. Neurosci. 8, 2804–2815 45. Meade, R. M., Fairlie, D. P. & Mason, J. M. α-Synuclein structure and Parkinson’s disease —
(1988). lessons and emerging principles. Mol. Neurodegener. 14, 29 (2019).
11. Ueda, K. et al. Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding an unrecognized component of 46. Mor, D. E., Ugras, S. E., Daniels, M. J. & Ischiropoulos, H. Dynamic structural flexibility of
amyloid in Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 11282–11286 (1993). α-synuclein. Neurobiol. Dis. 88, 66–74 (2016).
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 42

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
47. Adamczyk, A., Solecka, J. & Strosznajder, J. B. Expression of α-synuclein in different brain 80. Brahmachari, S. et al. Parkin interacting substrate zinc finger protein 746 is a pathological
parts of adult and aged rats. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 56, 29–37 (2005). mediator in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 142, 2380–2401 (2019).
48. Lavedan, C. The synuclein family. Genome Res. 8, 871–880 (1998). 81. Imam, S. Z. et al. Neuroprotective efficacy of a new brain-penetrating C-Abl inhibitor in a
49. Brenz Verca, M. S., Bahi, A., Boyer, F., Wagner, G. C. & Dreyer, J. L. Distribution of α- and murine Parkinson’s disease model. PLoS ONE 8, e65129 (2013).
&-synucleins in the adult rat brain and their modification by high-dose cocaine treatment. 82. Karim, M. R. et al. α-Synucleinopathy associated c-Abl activation causes p53-dependent
Eur. J. Neurosci. 18, 1923–1938 (2003). autophagy impairment. Mol. Neurodegener. 15, 27 (2020).
50. Burre, J. et al. α-Synuclein promotes SNARE-complex assembly in vivo and in vitro. 83. Karuppagounder, S. S. et al. The c-Abl inhibitor, nilotinib, protects dopaminergic neurons
Science 329, 1663–1667 (2010). in a preclinical animal model of Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Rep. 4, 4874 (2014).
51. Lopez-Ortega, E., Ruiz, R. & Tabares, L. CSPα, a molecular co-chaperone essential for 84. Karuppagounder, S. S. et al. The c-Abl inhibitor IkT-148009 suppresses
short and long-term synaptic maintenance. Front. Neurosci. 11, 39 (2017). neurodegeneration in mouse models of heritable and sporadic Parkinson’s disease.
52. Chandra, S., Gallardo, G., Fernandez-Chacon, R., Schluter, O. M. & Sudhof, T. C. Sci. Transl. Med. 15, eabp9352 (2023).
α-Synuclein cooperates with CSPα in preventing neurodegeneration. Cell 123, 383–396 85. Lee, S. et al. The c-Abl inhibitor, radotinib HCl, is neuroprotective in a preclinical
(2005). Parkinson’s disease mouse model. Hum. Mol. Genet. 27, 2344–2356 (2018).
53. Runwal, G. M. & Edwards, R. H. The role of α-synuclein in exocytosis. Exp. Neurol. 373, 86. Hasegawa, M. et al. Phosphorylated α-synuclein is ubiquitinated in α-synucleinopathy
114668 (2024). lesions. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 49071–49076 (2002).
54. Fernagut, P. O. & Chesselet, M. F. α-Synuclein and transgenic mouse models. Neurobiol. 87. Tofaris, G. K., Razzaq, A., Ghetti, B., Lilley, K. S. & Spillantini, M. G. Ubiquitination of
Dis. 17, 123–130 (2004). α-synuclein in Lewy bodies is a pathological event not associated with impairment
55. Nemani, V. M. et al. Increased expression of α-synuclein reduces neurotransmitter of proteasome function. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 44405–44411 (2003).
release by inhibiting synaptic vesicle reclustering after endocytosis. Neuron 65, 66–79 88. Liani, E. et al. Ubiquitylation of synphilin-1 and α-synuclein by SIAH and its presence
(2010). in cellular inclusions and Lewy bodies imply a role in Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad.
56. Scott, D. A. et al. A pathologic cascade leading to synaptic dysfunction in Sci. USA 101, 5500–5505 (2004).
α-synuclein-induced neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci. 30, 8083–8095 (2010). 89. Rott, R. et al. Monoubiquitylation of α-synuclein by seven in absentia homolog (SIAH)
57. Gaugler, M. N. et al. Nigrostriatal overabundance of α-synuclein leads to decreased promotes its aggregation in dopaminergic cells. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 3316–3328 (2008).
vesicle density and deficits in dopamine release that correlate with reduced motor 90. Kalia, L. V. et al. Ubiquitinylation of α-synuclein by carboxyl terminus Hsp70-interacting
activity. Acta Neuropathol. 123, 653–669 (2012). protein (CHIP) is regulated by Bcl-2-associated athanogene 5 (BAG5). PLoS ONE 6,
58. Lundblad, M., Decressac, M., Mattsson, B. & Bjorklund, A. Impaired neurotransmission e14695 (2011).
caused by overexpression of α-synuclein in nigral dopamine neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. 91. Shin, Y., Klucken, J., Patterson, C., Hyman, B. T. & McLean, P. J. The co-chaperone
Sci. USA 109, 3213–3219 (2012). carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP) mediates α-synuclein
59. Aniszewska, A., Bergstrom, J., Ingelsson, M. & Ekmark-Lewen, S. Modeling Parkinson’s degradation decisions between proteasomal and lysosomal pathways. J. Biol. Chem.
disease-related symptoms in α-synuclein overexpressing mice. Brain Behav. 12, e2628 280, 23727–23734 (2005).
(2022). 92. Tofaris, G. K. et al. Ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 promotes α-synuclein degradation by the
60. Manzanza, N. O., Sedlackova, L. & Kalaria, R. N. α-Synuclein post-translational endosomal–lysosomal pathway. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 17004–17009 (2011).
modifications: implications for pathogenesis of Lewy body disorders. Front. Aging 93. Rott, R. et al. SUMOylation and ubiquitination reciprocally regulate α-synuclein
Neurosci. 13, 690293 (2021). degradation and pathological aggregation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 13176–13181
61. Zhang, J., Li, X. & Li, J. D. The roles of post-translational modifications on α-synuclein in (2017).
the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s diseases. Front. Neurosci. 13, 381 (2019). 94. Burai, R., Ait-Bouziad, N., Chiki, A. & Lashuel, H. A. Elucidating the role of site-specific
62. Zhang, S. et al. Post-translational modifications of soluble α-synuclein regulate the nitration of α-synuclein in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease via protein
amplification of pathological α-synuclein. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 213–225 (2023). semisynthesis and mutagenesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 5041–5052 (2015).
63. Arawaka, S. et al. The role of G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 in pathogenesis of 95. Giasson, B. I. et al. Oxidative damage linked to neurodegeneration by selective
sporadic Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 26, 9227–9238 (2006). α-synuclein nitration in synucleinopathy lesions. Science 290, 985–989 (2000).
64. Okochi, M. et al. Constitutive phosphorylation of the Parkinson’s disease associated 96. Souza, J. M., Giasson, B. I., Chen, Q., Lee, V. M. & Ischiropoulos, H. Dityrosine cross-linking
α-synuclein. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 390–397 (2000). promotes formation of stable α-synuclein polymers. Implication of nitrative and oxidative
65. Paleologou, K. E. et al. Phosphorylation at S87 is enhanced in synucleinopathies, stress in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
inhibits α-synuclein oligomerization, and influences synuclein-membrane interactions. 18344–18349 (2000).
J. Neurosci. 30, 3184–3198 (2010). 97. Gao, H. M. et al. Neuroinflammation and oxidation/nitration of α-synuclein linked to
66. Waxman, E. A. & Giasson, B. I. Specificity and regulation of casein kinase-mediated dopaminergic neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci. 28, 7687–7698 (2008).
phosphorylation of α-synuclein. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 67, 402–416 (2008). 98. Benner, E. J. et al. Nitrated α-synuclein immunity accelerates degeneration of nigral
67. Brahmachari, S. et al. Activation of tyrosine kinase c-Abl contributes to dopaminergic neurons. PLoS ONE 3, e1376 (2008).
α-synuclein-induced neurodegeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 2970–2988 (2016). 99. Tansey, M. G. et al. Inflammation and immune dysfunction in Parkinson disease. Nat. Rev.
68. Ellis, C. E., Schwartzberg, P. L., Grider, T. L., Fink, D. W. & Nussbaum, R. L. α-Synuclein is Immunol. 22, 657–673 (2022).
phosphorylated by members of the Src family of protein-tyrosine kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 100. Chavarria, C. & Souza, J. M. Oxidation and nitration of α-synuclein and their implications
276, 3879–3884 (2001). in neurodegenerative diseases. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 533, 25–32 (2013).
69. Mahul-Mellier, A. L. et al. c-Abl phosphorylates α-synuclein and regulates its 101. Martinez-Vicente, M. et al. Dopamine-modified α-synuclein blocks chaperone-mediated
degradation: implication for α-synuclein clearance and contribution to the pathogenesis autophagy. J. Clin. Invest. 118, 777–788 (2008).
of Parkinson’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 23, 2858–2879 (2014). 102. Campbell, B. C. et al. The solubility of α-synuclein in multiple system atrophy differs from
70. Nakamura, T., Yamashita, H., Takahashi, T. & Nakamura, S. Activated Fyn phosphorylates that of dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem. 76, 87–96
α-synuclein at tyrosine residue 125. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 280, 1085–1092 (2001).
(2001). 103. Farzadfard, A. et al. The C-terminal tail of α-synuclein protects against aggregate
71. Sano, K. et al. Tyrosine 136 phosphorylation of α-synuclein aggregates in the Lewy body replication but is critical for oligomerization. Commun. Biol. 5, 123 (2022).
dementia brain: involvement of serine 129 phosphorylation by casein kinase 2. Acta 104. Izawa, Y. et al. Role of C-terminal negative charges and tyrosine residues in fibril
Neuropathol. Commun. 9, 182 (2021). formation of α-synuclein. Brain Behav. 2, 595–605 (2012).
72. Zhao, K. et al. Parkinson’s disease-related phosphorylation at Tyr39 rearranges 105. Li, W. et al. Aggregation promoting C-terminal truncation of α-synuclein is a
α-synuclein amyloid fibril structure revealed by cryo-EM. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, normal cellular process and is enhanced by the familial Parkinson’s disease-linked
20305–20315 (2020). mutations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 2162–2167 (2005).
73. Ramalingam, N. & Dettmer, U. α-Synuclein serine129 phosphorylation — the physiology 106. Prasad, K., Beach, T. G., Hedreen, J. & Richfield, E. K. Critical role of truncated α-synuclein
of pathology. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 84 (2023). and aggregates in Parkinson’s disease and incidental Lewy body disease. Brain Pathol.
74. Stewart, T. et al. Phosphorylated α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease: correlation depends 22, 811–825 (2012).
on disease severity. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 3, 7 (2015). 107. van der Wateren, I. M., Knowles, T. P. J., Buell, A. K., Dobson, C. M. & Galvagnion, C.
75. Feany, M. B. & Bender, W. W. A Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. Nature 404, C-terminal truncation of α-synuclein promotes amyloid fibril amplification at
394–398 (2000). physiological pH. Chem. Sci. 9, 5506–5516 (2018).
76. Kontaxi, C. & Edwards, R. H. Synuclein phosphorylation: pathogenic or physiologic. 108. Zhang, C. et al. C-terminal truncation modulates α-synuclein’s cytotoxicity and
NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 9, 47 (2023). aggregation by promoting the interactions with membrane and chaperone. Commun.
77. Ramalingam, N. et al. Dynamic physiological α-synuclein S129 phosphorylation is driven Biol. 5, 798 (2022).
by neuronal activity. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 9, 4 (2023). 109. Periquet, M., Fulga, T., Myllykangas, L., Schlossmacher, M. G. & Feany, M. B. Aggregated
78. Parra-Rivas, L. A. et al. Serine-129 phosphorylation of α-synuclein is an α-synuclein mediates dopaminergic neurotoxicity in vivo. J. Neurosci. 27, 3338–3346
activity-dependent trigger for physiologic protein–protein interactions and synaptic (2007).
function. Neuron 111, 4006–4023.e10 (2023). 110. Tofaris, G. K. et al. Pathological changes in dopaminergic nerve cells of the substantia
79. Burmann, B. M. et al. Regulation of α-synuclein by chaperones in mammalian cells. nigra and olfactory bulb in mice transgenic for truncated human α-synuclein(1–120):
Nature 577, 127–132 (2020). implications for Lewy body disorders. J. Neurosci. 26, 3942–3950 (2006).
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 43

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
111. Choi, D. H. et al. Role of matrix metalloproteinase 3-mediated α-synuclein cleavage in 146. Kim, J. Y., Illigens, B. M., McCormick, M. P., Wang, N. & Gibbons, C. H. α-Synuclein in skin
dopaminergic cell death. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 14168–14177 (2011). nerve fibers as a biomarker for α-synucleinopathies. J. Clin. Neurol. 15, 135–142 (2019).
112. Dufty, B. M. et al. Calpain-cleavage of α-synuclein: connecting proteolytic processing to 147. Konopleva, L. F., Shostka, I. P., Gromova, I. I. & Rogova, L. D. Primary familial pulmonary
disease-linked aggregation. Am. J. Pathol. 170, 1725–1738 (2007). hypertension. Vrach. Delo 1, 53–56 (1977).
113. Iwata, A. et al. α-Synuclein degradation by serine protease neurosin: implication for 148. Maass, F. et al. Increased α-synuclein tear fluid levels in patients with Parkinson’s disease.
pathogenesis of synucleinopathies. Hum. Mol. Genet. 12, 2625–2635 (2003). Sci. Rep. 10, 8507 (2020).
114. Mishizen-Eberz, A. J. et al. Distinct cleavage patterns of normal and pathologic forms of 149. Nam, D. et al. Detection and assessment of α-synuclein oligomers in the urine of
α-synuclein by calpain I in vitro. J. Neurochem. 86, 836–847 (2003). Parkinson’s disease patients. J. Parkinsons Dis. 10, 981–991 (2020).
115. Sung, J. Y. et al. Proteolytic cleavage of extracellular secreted α-synuclein via matrix 150. Holmes, B. B. et al. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate internalization and
metalloproteinases. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 25216–25224 (2005). propagation of specific proteopathic seeds. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, E3138–E3147
116. Wang, W. et al. Caspase-1 causes truncation and aggregation of the Parkinson’s (2013).
disease-associated protein α-synuclein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 9587–9592 (2016). 151. Mao, X. et al. Aplp1 interacts with Lag3 to facilitate transmission of pathologic
117. Zhang, Z. et al. Asparagine endopeptidase cleaves α-synuclein and mediates pathologic α-synuclein. Nat. Commun. 15, 4663 (2024).
activities in Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 24, 632–642 (2017). 152. Mao, X. et al. Pathological α-synuclein transmission initiated by binding
118. Braak, H. et al. Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. lymphocyte-activation gene 3. Science 353, eaah3374 (2016).
Neurobiol. Aging 24, 197–211 (2003). 153. George, S. et al. Microglia affect α-synuclein cell-to-cell transfer in a mouse model of
119. Braak, H., de Vos, R. A., Bohl, J. & Del Tredici, K. Gastric α-synuclein immunoreactive Parkinson’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 14, 34 (2019).
inclusions in Meissner’s and Auerbach’s plexuses in cases staged for Parkinson’s 154. Kim, C. et al. Neuron-released oligomeric α-synuclein is an endogenous agonist of TLR2
disease-related brain pathology. Neurosci. Lett. 396, 67–72 (2006). for paracrine activation of microglia. Nat. Commun. 4, 1562 (2013).
120. Braak, H., Rub, U., Gai, W. P. & Del Tredici, K. Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: possible 155. Shrivastava, A. N. et al. α-Synuclein assemblies sequester neuronal α3-Na+/K+-ATPase
routes by which vulnerable neuronal types may be subject to neuroinvasion by an and impair Na+ gradient. EMBO J. 34, 2408–2423 (2015).
unknown pathogen. J. Neural Transm. 110, 517–536 (2003). 156. Birol, M., Wojcik, S. P., Miranker, A. D. & Rhoades, E. Identification of N-linked glycans as
121. Liu, B. et al. Vagotomy and Parkinson disease: a Swedish register-based matched-cohort specific mediators of neuronal uptake of acetylated α-synuclein. PLoS Biol. 17, e3000318
study. Neurology 88, 1996–2002 (2017). (2019).
122. Svensson, E. et al. Vagotomy and subsequent risk of Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 78, 157. Aulic, S. et al. α-Synuclein amyloids hijack prion protein to gain cell entry,
522–529 (2015). facilitate cell-to-cell spreading and block prion replication. Sci. Rep. 7, 10050
123. Kim, S. et al. Transneuronal propagation of pathologic α-synuclein from the gut to the (2017).
brain models Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 103, 627–641.e7 (2019). 158. De Cecco, E. & Legname, G. The role of the prion protein in the internalization of
124. Roguski, A., Rayment, D., Whone, A. L., Jones, M. W. & Rolinski, M. A neurologist’s guide to α-synuclein amyloids. Prion 12, 23–27 (2018).
REM sleep behavior disorder. Front. Neurol. 11, 610 (2020). 159. Thom, T. et al. Cellular prion protein mediates α-synuclein uptake, localization, and
125. Horsager, J. et al. Brain-first versus body-first Parkinson’s disease: a multimodal imaging toxicity in vitro and in vivo. Mov. Disord. 37, 39–51 (2022).
case-control study. Brain 143, 3077–3088 (2020). 160. Urrea, L., Ferrer, I., Gavin, R. & Del Rio, J. A. The cellular prion protein (PrPC) as neuronal
126. Borghammer, P. et al. Neuropathological evidence of body-first vs. brain-first Lewy body receptor for α-synuclein. Prion 11, 226–233 (2017).
disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 161, 105557 (2021). 161. Urrea, L. et al. Involvement of cellular prion protein in α-synuclein transport in neurons.
127. Dorsey, E. R., De Miranda, B. R., Horsager, J. & Borghammer, P. The body, the brain, the Mol. Neurobiol. 55, 1847–1860 (2018).
environment, and Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons Dis. 14, 363–381 (2024). 162. Choi, Y. R. et al. Prion-like propagation of α-synuclein is regulated by the Fc&RIIB-SHP-1/2
128. Brundin, P., Li, J. Y., Holton, J. L., Lindvall, O. & Revesz, T. Research in motion: the enigma signaling pathway in neurons. Cell Rep. 22, 136–148 (2018).
of Parkinson’s disease pathology spread. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 741–745 (2008). 163. Chen, K. et al. LRP1 is a neuronal receptor for α-synuclein uptake and spread. Mol.
129. Kordower, J. H., Chu, Y., Hauser, R. A., Freeman, T. B. & Olanow, C. W. Lewy body-like Neurodegener. 17, 57 (2022).
pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med. 14, 164. Diaz-Ortiz, M. E. et al. GPNMB confers risk for Parkinson’s disease through interaction
504–506 (2008). with α-synuclein. Science 377, eabk0637 (2022).
130. Kordower, J. H., Chu, Y., Hauser, R. A., Olanow, C. W. & Freeman, T. B. Transplanted 165. Sanyal, A. et al. Constitutive endolysosomal perforation in neurons allows induction
dopaminergic neurons develop PD pathologic changes: a second case report. Mov. of α-synuclein aggregation by internalized pre-formed fibrils. Preprint at bioRxiv
Disord. 23, 2303–2306 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.30.573738 (2024).
131. Li, J. Y. et al. Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s disease suggest 166. Danzer, K. M. et al. Heat-shock protein 70 modulates toxic extracellular α-synuclein
host-to-graft disease propagation. Nat. Med. 14, 501–503 (2008). oligomers and rescues trans-synaptic toxicity. FASEB J. 25, 326–336 (2011).
132. Desplats, P. et al. Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron 167. Emmanouilidou, E. et al. Cell-produced α-synuclein is secreted in a calcium-dependent
transmission of α-synuclein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 13010–13015 (2009). manner by exosomes and impacts neuronal survival. J. Neurosci. 30, 6838–6851
133. Luk, K. C. et al. Exogenous α-synuclein fibrils seed the formation of Lewy body-like (2010).
intracellular inclusions in cultured cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20051–20056 168. Tsigelny, I. F. et al. Role of α-synuclein penetration into the membrane in the mechanisms
(2009). of oligomer pore formation. FEBS J. 279, 1000–1013 (2012).
134. Volpicelli-Daley, L. A. et al. Exogenous α-synuclein fibrils induce Lewy body pathology 169. Abounit, S. et al. Tunneling nanotubes spread fibrillar α-synuclein by intercellular
leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuron death. Neuron 72, 57–71 (2011). trafficking of lysosomes. EMBO J. 35, 2120–2138 (2016).
135. Luk, K. C. et al. Pathological α-synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like 170. Loria, F. et al. α-Synuclein transfer between neurons and astrocytes indicates that
neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science 338, 949–953 (2012). astrocytes play a role in degradation rather than in spreading. Acta Neuropathol. 134,
136. Luk, K. C. et al. Intracerebral inoculation of pathological α-synuclein initiates a rapidly 789–808 (2017).
progressive neurodegenerative α-synucleinopathy in mice. J. Exp. Med. 209, 975–986 171. Fraser, H. & Dickinson, A. G. Scrapie in mice. Agent-strain differences in the distribution
(2012). and intensity of grey matter vacuolation. J. Comp. Pathol. 83, 29–40 (1973).
137. Masuda-Suzukake, M. et al. Prion-like spreading of pathological α-synuclein in brain. 172. Bousset, L. et al. Structural and functional characterization of two α-synuclein strains.
Brain 136, 1128–1138 (2013). Nat. Commun. 4, 2575 (2013).
138. Henderson, M. X. et al. Spread of α-synuclein pathology through the brain connectome 173. Guo, J. L. et al. Distinct α-synuclein strains differentially promote tau inclusions in
is modulated by selective vulnerability and predicted by network analysis. Nat. Neurosci. neurons. Cell 154, 103–117 (2013).
22, 1248–1257 (2019). 174. Lau, A. et al. α-Synuclein strains target distinct brain regions and cell types.
139. Mezias, C., Rey, N., Brundin, P. & Raj, A. Neural connectivity predicts spreading of Nat. Neurosci. 23, 21–31 (2020).
α-synuclein pathology in fibril-injected mouse models: involvement of retrograde and 175. Peelaerts, W. et al. α-Synuclein strains cause distinct synucleinopathies after local and
anterograde axonal propagation. Neurobiol. Dis. 134, 104623 (2020). systemic administration. Nature 522, 340–344 (2015).
140. Pandya, S. et al. Predictive model of spread of Parkinson’s pathology using network 176. Van der Perren, A. et al. The structural differences between patient-derived α-synuclein
diffusion. NeuroImage 192, 178–194 (2019). strains dictate characteristics of Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy and
141. Henrich, M. T. et al. Determinants of seeding and spreading of α-synuclein pathology in dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol. 139, 977–1000 (2020).
the brain. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc2487 (2020). 177. Dhavale, D. D. et al. Structure of α-synuclein fibrils derived from human Lewy body
142. Lee, S. J. Origins and effects of extracellular α-synuclein: implications in Parkinson’s dementia tissue. Nat. Commun. 15, 2750 (2024).
disease. J. Mol. Neurosci. 34, 17–22 (2008). 178. Yang, Y. et al. Structures of α-synuclein filaments from human brains with Lewy
143. Lee, H. J., Bae, E. J. & Lee, S. J. Extracellular α-synuclein — a novel and crucial factor in pathology. Nature 610, 791–795 (2022).
Lewy body diseases. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10, 92–98 (2014). 179. Peng, C. et al. Cellular milieu imparts distinct pathological α-synuclein strains in
144. El-Agnaf, O. M. et al. α-Synuclein implicated in Parkinson’s disease is present in α-synucleinopathies. Nature 557, 558–563 (2018).
extracellular biological fluids, including human plasma. FASEB J. 17, 1945–1947 180. Just, M. K. et al. α-Synuclein strain variability in body-first and brain-first
(2003). synucleinopathies. Front. Aging Neurosci. 14, 907293 (2022).
145. El-Agnaf, O. M. et al. Detection of oligomeric forms of α-synuclein protein in human 181. Okuzumi, A. et al. α-Synuclein seeding assay using RT-QuIC. Methods Mol. Biol. 2322,
plasma as a potential biomarker for Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 20, 419–425 (2006). 3–16 (2021).
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 44

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
182. Shahnawaz, M. et al. Development of a biochemical diagnosis of Parkinson disease by 213. Teil, M. et al. Targeting α-synuclein for PD therapeutics: a pursuit on all fronts.
detection of α-synuclein misfolded aggregates in cerebrospinal fluid. JAMA Neurol. 74, Biomolecules https://doi.org/10.3390/biom10030391 (2020).
163–172 (2017). 214. McFarthing, K. et al. Parkinson’s disease drug therapies in the clinical trial pipeline:
183. Kang, U. J. et al. Comparative study of cerebrospinal fluid α-synuclein seeding 2024 update. J. Parkinsons Dis. 14, 899–912 (2024).
aggregation assays for diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 34, 536–544 215. Messer, A. & Butler, D. C. Optimizing intracellular antibodies (intrabodies/nanobodies) to
(2019). treat neurodegenerative disorders. Neurobiol. Dis. 134, 104619 (2020).
184. Shahnawaz, M. et al. Discriminating α-synuclein strains in Parkinson’s disease and 216. Spencer, B. et al. α-Synuclein conformational antibodies fused to penetratin are effective
multiple system atrophy. Nature 578, 273–277 (2020). in models of Lewy body disease. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 3, 588–606 (2016).
185. Simuni, T. et al. A biological definition of neuronal α-synuclein disease: towards an 217. Bae, E. J. et al. Antibody-aided clearance of extracellular α-synuclein prevents cell-to-cell
integrated staging system for research. Lancet Neurol. 23, 178–190 (2024). aggregate transmission. J. Neurosci. 32, 13454–13469 (2012).
186. Oftedal, L., Maple-Grodem, J., Tysnes, O. B., Alves, G. & Lange, J. Seed amplification 218. Brundin, P., Dave, K. D. & Kordower, J. H. Therapeutic approaches to target α-synuclein
assay as a diagnostic tool in newly-diagnosed Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons Dis. 13, pathology. Exp. Neurol. 298, 225–235 (2017).
841–844 (2023). 219. Sanchez-Guajardo, V., Annibali, A., Jensen, P. H. & Romero-Ramos, M. α-Synuclein
187. Concha-Marambio, L., Pritzkow, S., Shahnawaz, M., Farris, C. M. & Soto, C. Seed vaccination prevents the accumulation of Parkinson disease-like pathologic inclusions in
amplification assay for the detection of pathologic α-synuclein aggregates in striatum in association with regulatory T cell recruitment in a rat model. J. Neuropathol.
cerebrospinal fluid. Nat. Protoc. 18, 1179–1196 (2023). Exp. Neurol. 72, 624–645 (2013).
188. Fernandes Gomes, B. et al. α-Synuclein seed amplification assay as a diagnostic tool for 220. Spencer, B. et al. Anti-α-synuclein immunotherapy reduces α-synuclein propagation
parkinsonian disorders. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 117, 105807 (2023). in the axon and degeneration in a combined viral vector and transgenic model of
189. Siderowf, A. et al. Assessment of heterogeneity among participants in the Parkinson’s synucleinopathy. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 5, 7 (2017).
Progression Markers Initiative cohort using α-synuclein seed amplification: a cross- 221. Lang, A. E. et al. Trial of cinpanemab in early Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 387,
sectional study. Lancet Neurol. 22, 407–417 (2023). 408–420 (2022).
190. Kluge, A. et al. Detecting misfolded α-synuclein in blood years before the diagnosis of 222. Pagano, G. et al. Trial of prasinezumab in early-stage Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med.
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 39, 1289–1299 (2024). 387, 421–432 (2022).
191. Grossauer, A. et al. α-Synuclein seed amplification assays in the diagnosis of 223. Pagano, G. et al. Prasinezumab slows motor progression in rapidly progressing
synucleinopathies using cerebrospinal fluid — a systematic review and meta-analysis. early-stage Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med. 30, 1096–1103 (2024).
Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 10, 737–747 (2023). 224. Webb, J. L., Ravikumar, B., Atkins, J., Skepper, J. N. & Rubinsztein, D. C. α-Synuclein is
192. Okuzumi, A. et al. Propagative α-synuclein seeds as serum biomarkers for degraded by both autophagy and the proteasome. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 25009–25013
synucleinopathies. Nat. Med. 29, 1448–1455 (2023). (2003).
193. Bellomo, G. et al. α-Synuclein seed amplification assays for diagnosing 225. Decressac, M. et al. TFEB-mediated autophagy rescues midbrain dopamine neurons from
synucleinopathies: the way forward. Neurology 99, 195–205 (2022). α-synuclein toxicity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, E1817–E1826 (2013).
194. Chahine, L. M. et al. Central and peripheral α-synuclein in Parkinson disease detected by 226. Ebrahimi-Fakhari, D. et al. Distinct roles in vivo for the ubiquitin–proteasome system and
seed amplification assay. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 10, 696–705 (2023). the autophagy–lysosomal pathway in the degradation of α-synuclein. J. Neurosci. 31,
195. Yoo, D. et al. Diagnostic value of α-synuclein seeding amplification assays in 14508–14520 (2011).
α-synucleinopathies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 227. Spencer, B. et al. Beclin 1 gene transfer activates autophagy and ameliorates the
104, 99–109 (2022). neurodegenerative pathology in α-synuclein models of Parkinson’s and Lewy body
196. Brockmann, K. et al. CSF α-synuclein seed amplification kinetic profiles are associated diseases. J. Neurosci. 29, 13578–13588 (2009).
with cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 10, 24 (2024). 228. Lopes da Fonseca, T., Villar-Pique, A. & Outeiro, T. F. The interplay between α-synuclein
197. Endo, H. et al. Imaging α-synuclein pathologies in animal models and patients with clearance and spreading. Biomolecules 5, 435–471 (2015).
Parkinson’s and related diseases. Neuron 112, 2540–2557.e8 (2024). 229. Lee, J. et al. Targeted degradation of α-synuclein aggregates in Parkinson’s disease using
198. Smith, R. et al. The α-synuclein PET tracer [18F] ACI-12589 distinguishes multiple system the AUTOTAC technology. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 41 (2023).
atrophy from other neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Commun. 14, 6750 (2023). 230. Gao, J., Perera, G., Bhadbhade, M., Halliday, G. M. & Dzamko, N. Autophagy activation
199. Xiang, J. et al. Development of an α-synuclein positron emission tomography tracer for promotes clearance of α-synuclein inclusions in fibril-seeded human neural cells. J. Biol.
imaging synucleinopathies. Cell 186, 3350–3367.e19 (2023). Chem. 294, 14241–14256 (2019).
200. Alarcon-Aris, D. et al. Selective α-synuclein knockdown in monoamine neurons by 231. Cuervo, A. M., Stefanis, L., Fredenburg, R., Lansbury, P. T. & Sulzer, D. Impaired
intranasal oligonucleotide delivery: potential therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Mol. Ther. degradation of mutant α-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Science 305,
26, 550–567 (2018). 1292–1295 (2004).
201. Cole, T. A. et al. α-Synuclein antisense oligonucleotides as a disease-modifying therapy 232. Wang, Y. T. & Lu, J. H. Targeting chaperone-mediated autophagy for Parkinson’s disease
for Parkinson’s disease. JCI Insight 6, e135633 (2021). therapy. Neural Regen. Res. 18, 1723–1724 (2023).
202. Uehara, T. et al. Amido-bridged nucleic acid (AmNA)-modified antisense 233. Frazzitta, G. et al. The beneficial role of intensive exercise on Parkinson disease
oligonucleotides targeting α-synuclein as a novel therapy for Parkinson’s disease. progression. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 92, 523–532 (2013).
Sci. Rep. 9, 7567 (2019). 234. Malczynska-Sims, P., Chalimoniuk, M. & Sulek, A. The effect of endurance training on
203. Alarcon-Aris, D. et al. Anti-α-synuclein ASO delivered to monoamine neurons prevents brain-derived neurotrophic factor and inflammatory markers in healthy people and
α-synuclein accumulation in a Parkinson’s disease-like mouse model and in monkeys. Parkinson’s disease. A narrative review. Front. Physiol. 11, 578981 (2020).
EBioMedicine 59, 102944 (2020). 235. Schenkman, M. et al. Effect of high-intensity treadmill exercise on motor symptoms
204. Yang, J. et al. Exosome-mediated delivery of antisense oligonucleotides targeting in patients with de novo Parkinson disease: a phase 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA
α-synuclein ameliorates the pathology in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurol. 75, 219–226 (2018).
Neurobiol. Dis. 148, 105218 (2021). 236. Zarbakhsh, S. et al. Irisin protects the substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons in the rat
205. Shalaby, K. E., Aouida, M., Gupta, V., Abdesselem, H. & El-Agnaf, O. M. A. Development model of Parkinson’s disease. Iran. J. Basic Med. Sci. 22, 722–728 (2019).
of non-viral vectors for neuronal-targeted delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 RNA-proteins as a 237. Zhang, X. et al. Irisin exhibits neuroprotection by preventing mitochondrial damage in
therapeutic strategy for neurological disorders. Biomater. Sci. 10, 4959–4977 (2022). Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 9, 13 (2023).
206. Fellner, L. et al. Anle138b partly ameliorates motor deficits despite failure of 238. Kam, T. I. et al. Amelioration of pathologic α-synuclein-induced Parkinson’s disease by
neuroprotection in a model of advanced multiple system atrophy. Front. Neurosci. 10, 99 irisin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2204835119 (2022).
(2016). 239. Panwar, V. et al. Multifaceted role of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin)
207. Lemos, M. et al. Targeting α-synuclein by PD03 AFFITOPE® and anle138b rescues signaling pathway in human health and disease. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 8, 375
neurodegenerative pathology in a model of multiple system atrophy: clinical relevance. (2023).
Transl. Neurodegener. 9, 38 (2020). 240. Khan, M. R. et al. Enhanced mTORC1 signaling and protein synthesis in pathologic
208. Levin, J. et al. The oligomer modulator anle138b inhibits disease progression in α-synuclein cellular and animal models of Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 15,
a Parkinson mouse model even with treatment started after disease onset. Acta eadd0499 (2023).
Neuropathol. 127, 779–780 (2014). 241. Bove, J., Martinez-Vicente, M. & Vila, M. Fighting neurodegeneration with rapamycin:
209. Wagner, J. et al. Anle138b: a novel oligomer modulator for disease-modifying therapy of mechanistic insights. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 437–452 (2011).
neurodegenerative diseases such as prion and Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 242. Moors, T. E. et al. Therapeutic potential of autophagy-enhancing agents in Parkinson’s
125, 795–813 (2013). disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 12, 11 (2017).
210. Wegrzynowicz, M. et al. Depopulation of dense α-synuclein aggregates is associated 243. Jahrling, J. B. & Laberge, R. M. Age-related neurodegeneration prevention through mTOR
with rescue of dopamine neuron dysfunction and death in a new Parkinson’s disease inhibition: potential mechanisms and remaining questions. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 15,
model. Acta Neuropathol. 138, 575–595 (2019). 2139–2151 (2015).
211. Wrasidlo, W. et al. A de novo compound targeting α-synuclein improves deficits in 244. Sidransky, E. & Lopez, G. The link between the GBA gene and parkinsonism. Lancet
models of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 139, 3217–3236 (2016). Neurol. 11, 986–998 (2012).
212. Grosso Jasutkar, H., Oh, S. E. & Mouradian, M. M. Therapeutics in the pipeline targeting 245. Sidransky, E. et al. Multicenter analysis of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson’s
α-synuclein for Parkinson’s disease. Pharm. Rev. 74, 207–237 (2022). disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 1651–1661 (2009).
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 45

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
246. Smith, L. & Schapira, A. H. V. GBA variants and Parkinson disease: mechanisms and 280. Nguyen, L. T. N. et al. Role of NLRP3 inflammasome in Parkinson’s disease and
treatments. Cells https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11081261 (2022). therapeutic considerations. J. Parkinsons Dis. 12, 2117–2133 (2022).
247. Mazzulli, J. R. et al. Gaucher disease glucocerebrosidase and α-synuclein form a 281. Harms, A. S., Ferreira, S. A. & Romero-Ramos, M. Periphery and brain, innate and adaptive
bidirectional pathogenic loop in synucleinopathies. Cell 146, 37–52 (2011). immunity in Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 141, 527–545 (2021).
248. Menozzi, E., Toffoli, M. & Schapira, A. H. V. Targeting the GBA1 pathway to slow Parkinson 282. Sulzer, D. et al. T cells from patients with Parkinson’s disease recognize α-synuclein
disease: insights into clinical aspects, pathogenic mechanisms and new therapeutic peptides. Nature 546, 656–661 (2017).
avenues. Pharmacol. Ther. 246, 108419 (2023). 283. Brochard, V. et al. Infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes into the brain contributes to
249. Park, H., Kam, T. I., Dawson, T. M. & Dawson, V. L. Poly (ADP-ribose) (PAR)-dependent cell neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson disease. J. Clin. Invest. 119, 182–192
death in neurodegenerative diseases. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 353, 1–29 (2020). (2009).
250. Kam, T. I. et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) drives pathologic α-synuclein neurodegeneration in 284. Galiano-Landeira, J., Torra, A., Vila, M. & Bove, J. CD8 T cell nigral infiltration precedes
Parkinson’s disease. Science 362, eaat8407 (2018). synucleinopathy in early stages of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 143, 3717–3733 (2020).
251. Mao, K. et al. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 inhibition prevents neurodegeneration and 285. Hamza, T. H. et al. Common genetic variation in the HLA region is associated with
promotes α-synuclein degradation via transcription factor EB-dependent autophagy in late-onset sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Genet. 42, 781–785 (2010).
mutant α-synuclein A53T model of Parkinson’s disease. Aging Cell 19, e13163 (2020). 286. Wissemann, W. T. et al. Association of Parkinson disease with structural and regulatory
252. Burguillos, M. A. et al. Apoptosis-inducing factor mediates dopaminergic cell death variants in the HLA region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93, 984–993 (2013).
in response to LPS-induced inflammatory stimulus: evidence in Parkinson’s disease 287. Naito, T. et al. Trans-ethnic fine-mapping of the major histocompatibility complex region
patients. Neurobiol. Dis. 41, 177–188 (2011). linked to Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 36, 1805–1814 (2021).
253. Wang, Y. et al. A nuclease that mediates cell death induced by DNA damage and 288. Theodore, S., Cao, S., McLean, P. J. & Standaert, D. G. Targeted overexpression of human
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1. Science 354, eaad6872 (2016). α-synuclein triggers microglial activation and an adaptive immune response in a mouse
254. Park, H. et al. PAAN/MIF nuclease inhibition prevents neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s model of Parkinson disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 67, 1149–1158 (2008).
disease. Cell 185, 1943–1959.e21 (2022). 289. Williams, G. P. et al. CD4 T cells mediate brain inflammation and neurodegeneration in a
255. Geibl, F. F. et al. α-Synuclein pathology disrupts mitochondrial function in dopaminergic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 144, 2047–2059 (2021).
and cholinergic neurons at-risk in Parkinson’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. https://doi.org/ 290. Cebrian, C. et al. MHC-I expression renders catecholaminergic neurons susceptible to
10.1186/s13024-024-00756-2 (2024). T-cell-mediated degeneration. Nat. Commun. 5, 3633 (2014).
256. Andrabi, S. A. et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymer is a death signal. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 291. Gate, D. et al. CD4+ T cells contribute to neurodegeneration in Lewy body dementia.
USA 103, 18308–18313 (2006). Science 374, 868–874 (2021).
257. Andrabi, S. A. et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-dependent energy depletion occurs 292. Iba, M. et al. Neuroinflammation is associated with infiltration of T cells in Lewy
through inhibition of glycolysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 10209–10214 (2014). body disease and α-synuclein transgenic models. J. Neuroinflammation 17, 214
258. Fouquerel, E. et al. ARTD1/PARP1 negatively regulates glycolysis by inhibiting hexokinase (2020).
1 independent of NAD+ depletion. Cell Rep. 8, 1819–1831 (2014). 293. Su, X. et al. Synuclein activates microglia in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol.
259. Hossain, M. I. et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) mediates bioenergetic defects and redox imbalance Aging 29, 1690–1701 (2008).
in neurons following oxygen and glucose deprivation. FASEB J. 38, e23556 (2024). 294. Zhang, W. et al. Aggregated α-synuclein activates microglia: a process leading to disease
260. Ko, H. S. et al. Phosphorylation by the c-Abl protein tyrosine kinase inhibits parkin’s progression in Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 19, 533–542 (2005).
ubiquitination and protective function. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 16691–16696 295. Barkholt, P., Sanchez-Guajardo, V., Kirik, D. & Romero-Ramos, M. Long-term polarization
(2010). of microglia upon α-synuclein overexpression in nonhuman primates. Neuroscience 208,
261. Panicker, N. et al. Neuronal NLRP3 is a parkin substrate that drives neurodegeneration in 85–96 (2012).
Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 110, 2422–2437.e9 (2022). 296. Bido, S. et al. Microglia-specific overexpression of α-synuclein leads to severe
262. Blagov, A. V. et al. Prospects for the development of pink1 and parkin activators dopaminergic neurodegeneration by phagocytic exhaustion and oxidative toxicity. Nat.
for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Pharmaceutics https://doi.org/10.3390/ Commun. 12, 6237 (2021).
pharmaceutics14112514 (2022). 297. Castro-Sanchez, S. et al. Cx3cr1-deficiency exacerbates α-synuclein-A53T induced
263. Brahmachari, S. et al. c-Abl and Parkinson’s disease: mechanisms and therapeutic neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease.
potential. J. Parkinsons Dis. 7, 589–601 (2017). Glia 66, 1752–1762 (2018).
264. Hebron, M. L., Lonskaya, I. & Moussa, C. E. Nilotinib reverses loss of dopamine neurons 298. Duffy, M. F. et al. Lewy body-like α-synuclein inclusions trigger reactive microgliosis prior
and improves motor behavior via autophagic degradation of α-synuclein in Parkinson’s to nigral degeneration. J. Neuroinflammation 15, 129 (2018).
disease models. Hum. Mol. Genet. 22, 3315–3328 (2013). 299. Rauschenberger, L. et al. Age-dependent neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in
265. Imam, S. Z. et al. Novel regulation of parkin function through c-Abl-mediated tyrosine a genetic A30P/A53T double-mutated α-synuclein mouse model of Parkinson’s disease.
phosphorylation: implications for Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 31, 157–163 (2011). Neurobiol. Dis. 171, 105798 (2022).
266. Pagan, F. L. et al. Nilotinib effects on safety, tolerability, and potential biomarkers in 300. Yun, S. P. et al. Block of A1 astrocyte conversion by microglia is neuroprotective in
parkinson disease: a phase 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 77, 309–317 models of Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med. 24, 931–938 (2018).
(2020). 301. McGeer, P. L., Itagaki, S., Boyes, B. E. & McGeer, E. G. Reactive microglia are positive for
267. Simuni, T. et al. Efficacy of nilotinib in patients with moderately advanced parkinson HLA-DR in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease brains. Neurology
disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 78, 312–320 (2021). 38, 1285–1291 (1988).
268. Werner, M. H. & Olanow, C. W. Parkinson’s disease modification through Abl kinase 302. McGeer, P. L. & McGeer, E. G. Inflammation and neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s
inhibition: an opportunity. Mov. Disord. 37, 6–15 (2022). disease. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 10, S3–S7 (2004).
269. Chandia-Cristi, A. et al. Prophylactic treatment with the c-Abl inhibitor, neurotinib, 303. Klegeris, A. et al. α-Synuclein activates stress signaling protein kinases in THP-1 cells and
diminishes neuronal damage and the convulsive state in pilocarpine-induced mice. Cell microglia. Neurobiol. Aging 29, 739–752 (2008).
Rep. 43, 114144 (2024). 304. Lee, S. B. et al. Identification of the amino acid sequence motif of α-synuclein responsible
270. Lee, M. H. et al. Bi-directional regulation of AIMP2 and its splice variant on PARP-1- for macrophage activation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 381, 39–43 (2009).
dependent neuronal cell death; therapeutic implication for Parkinson’s disease. Acta 305. Grozdanov, V. et al. Increased immune activation by pathologic α-synuclein in
Neuropathol. Commun. 12, 5 (2024). Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 86, 593–606 (2019).
271. Lee, Y. et al. Parthanatos mediates AIMP2-activated age-dependent dopaminergic 306. Heidari, A., Yazdanpanah, N. & Rezaei, N. The role of Toll-like receptors and
neuronal loss. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1392–1400 (2013). neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 19, 135 (2022).
272. Kumar, M. et al. Defects in mitochondrial biogenesis drive mitochondrial alterations in 307. Kim, C. et al. Antagonizing neuronal toll-like receptor 2 prevents synucleinopathy by
PARKIN-deficient human dopamine neurons. Stem Cell Rep. 15, 629–645 (2020). activating autophagy. Cell Rep. 13, 771–782 (2015).
273. Shin, J. H. et al. PARIS (ZNF746) repression of PGC-1α contributes to neurodegeneration 308. Kim, C. et al. Immunotherapy targeting Toll-like receptor 2 alleviates neurodegeneration
in Parkinson’s disease. Cell 144, 689–702 (2011). in models of synucleinopathy by modulating α-synuclein transmission and
274. Stevens, D. A. et al. Parkin loss leads to PARIS-dependent declines in mitochondrial mass neuroinflammation. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 43 (2018).
and respiration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 11696–11701 (2015). 309. Stefanova, N. et al. Toll-like receptor 4 promotes α-synuclein clearance and survival of
275. Jo, A. et al. PARIS farnesylation prevents neurodegeneration in models of Parkinson’s nigral dopaminergic neurons. Am. J. Pathol. 179, 954–963 (2011).
disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, eaax8891 (2021). 310. Choi, Y. R. et al. Fc&RIIB mediates the inhibitory effect of aggregated α-synuclein on
276. Kim, H. et al. S-nitrosylated PARIS leads to the sequestration of PGC-1α into insoluble microglial phagocytosis. Neurobiol. Dis. 83, 90–99 (2015).
deposits in Parkinson’s disease model. Cells https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11223682 311. Panicker, N. et al. Fyn kinase regulates misfolded α-synuclein uptake and NLRP3
(2022). inflammasome activation in microglia. J. Exp. Med. 216, 1411–1430 (2019).
277. Lee, Y. et al. PINK1 primes parkin-mediated ubiquitination of PARIS in dopaminergic 312. Fan, Z. et al. Systemic activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and plasma α-synuclein levels
neuronal survival. Cell Rep. 18, 918–932 (2017). are correlated with motor severity and progression in Parkinson’s disease.
278. Yan, Y. Q. et al. Parkin regulates microglial NLRP3 and represses neurodegeneration in J. Neuroinflammation 17, 11 (2020).
Parkinson’s disease. Aging Cell 22, e13834 (2023). 313. Hinkle, J. T. et al. STING mediates neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in
279. Gordon, R. et al. Inflammasome inhibition prevents α-synuclein pathology and nigrostriatal α-synucleinopathy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2118819119
dopaminergic neurodegeneration in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaah4066 (2018). (2022).
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 46

---PAGE BREAK---

Review article
314. Jiang, S. Y. et al. The cGAS–STING–YY1 axis accelerates progression of 337. McGarry, A. et al. Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of NLY01 in early untreated Parkinson’s
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease via LCN2-dependent disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 23, 37–45
astrocyte senescence. Cell Death Differ. 30, 2280–2292 (2023). (2024).
315. Standaert, D. G. & Childers, G. M. α-Synuclein-mediated DNA damage, STING 338. Athauda, D. et al. Post hoc analysis of the exenatide-PD trial — factors that predict
activation, and neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, response. Eur. J. Neurosci. 49, 410–421 (2019).
e2204058119 (2022). 339. Vijiaratnam, N. et al. Exenatide once weekly over 2 years as a potential disease-modifying
316. Sterling, J. K. et al. Interleukin-6 triggers toxic neuronal iron sequestration in response to treatment for Parkinson’s disease: protocol for a multicentre, randomised, double blind,
pathological α-synuclein. Cell Rep. 38, 110358 (2022). parallel group, placebo controlled, phase 3 trial: the ‘Exenatide-PD3’ study. BMJ Open 11,
317. Hoenen, C. et al. α-Synuclein proteins promote pro-inflammatory cascades in microglia: e047993 (2021).
stronger effects of the A53T mutant. PLoS ONE 11, e0162717 (2016). 340. Berg, D. et al. Prodromal Parkinson disease subtypes — key to understanding
318. Jiang, T. et al. P2X7 receptor is critical in α-synuclein-mediated microglial NADPH oxidase heterogeneity. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 349–361 (2021).
activation. Neurobiol. Aging 36, 2304–2318 (2015).
319. Zhang, W. et al. Microglial PHOX and Mac-1 are essential to the enhanced dopaminergic Acknowledgements
neurodegeneration elicited by A30P and A53T mutant α-synuclein. Glia 55, 1178–1188 This work was supported by grants from the US National Institutes of Health/National Institute
(2007). on Aging AG085688, the JPB Foundation, Aligning Science Across Parkinson’s (020608)
320. Lee, H. J. et al. Direct transfer of α-synuclein from neuron to astroglia causes through the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Farmer Family Foundation
inflammatory responses in synucleinopathies. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 9262–9272 (2010). Parkinson’s Research Initiative, Robert J. and Claire Pasarow Foundation, Parkinson’s
321. Braak, H., Sastre, M. & Del Tredici, K. Development of α-synuclein immunoreactive Foundation and the National Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2023-00278580). The
astrocytes in the forebrain parallels stages of intraneuronal pathology in sporadic authors acknowledge the joint participation by the Adrienne Helis Malvin Medical Research
Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 114, 231–241 (2007). Foundation and the Diana Helis Henry Research Foundation through its direct engagement
322. Wakabayashi, K., Hayashi, S., Yoshimoto, M., Kudo, H. & Takahashi, H. NACP/α-synuclein- in the continuous active conduct of medical research in conjunction with the Johns Hopkins
positive filamentous inclusions in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes of Parkinson’s Hospital and the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the Foundation’s
disease brains. Acta Neuropathol. 99, 14–20 (2000). Parkinson’s Disease Program M-2019 and H-2021, respectively. T.M.D. is the Leonard and
323. Klegeris, A. et al. α-Synuclein and its disease-causing mutants induce ICAM-1 and IL-6 in Madlyn Abramson Professor in Neurodegenerative Diseases.
human astrocytes and astrocytoma cells. FASEB J. 20, 2000–2008 (2006).
324. Sengul, B., Dursun, E., Verkhratsky, A. & Gezen-Ak, D. Overexpression of α-synuclein Author contributions
reorganises growth factor profile of human astrocytes. Mol. Neurobiol. 58, 184–203 H.P., T.-I.K. and T.M.D. researched data for the article and wrote the article. V.L.D. and T.M.D.
(2021). reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission. All authors made substantial
325. Fellner, L. et al. Toll-like receptor 4 is required for α-synuclein dependent activation of contributions to discussion of the content.
microglia and astroglia. Glia 61, 349–360 (2013).
326. Rannikko, E. H., Weber, S. S. & Kahle, P. J. Exogenous α-synuclein induces Toll-like Competing interests
receptor 4 dependent inflammatory responses in astrocytes. BMC Neurosci. 16, 57 T.M.D. owns stock in Aevum Therapeutics and stock options in D&D Pharmatech, Inhibikase
(2015). Therapeutics and Ventyx Biosciences; holds equity in D&D Pharmatech; is compensated for
327. Angelova, P. R. et al. Ca2+ is a key factor in α-synuclein-induced neurotoxicity. J. Cell Sci. his role on the scientific advisory boards of Aevum and Ventyx; is entitled to royalties from
129, 1792–1801 (2016). AbbVie; and is a founder and inventor of technology for Neuraly, which is now a subsidiary of
328. Stefanova, N., Klimaschewski, L., Poewe, W., Wenning, G. K. & Reindl, M. Glial cell death D&D Pharmatech. V.L.D. owns stock options in D&D Pharmatech and Inhibikase Therapeutics;
induced by overexpression of α-synuclein. J. Neurosci. Res. 65, 432–438 (2001). holds equity in D&D Pharmatech; and is a founder and inventor of technology for Neuraly,
329. Gu, X. L. et al. Astrocytic expression of Parkinson’s disease-related A53T α-synuclein which is now a subsidiary of D&D Pharmatech. The other authors declare no competing
causes neurodegeneration in mice. Mol. Brain 3, 12 (2010). interests.
330. Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia.
Nature 541, 481–487 (2017). Additional information
331. Guttenplan, K. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes induce cell death via saturated Peer review information Nature Reviews Neurology thanks R. Takahashi and the other,
lipids. Nature 599, 102–107 (2021). anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
332. Erbil, D. et al. GLP-1’s role in neuroprotection: a systematic review. Brain Inj. 33, 734–819
(2019). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
333. Brauer, R. et al. Diabetes medications and risk of Parkinson’s disease: a cohort study of published maps and institutional affiliations.
patients with diabetes. Brain 143, 3067–3076 (2020).
334. Athauda, D. et al. Exenatide once weekly versus placebo in Parkinson’s disease: a Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 390, 1664–1675 (2017). article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author
335. Aviles-Olmos, I. et al. Exenatide and the treatment of patients with Parkinson’s disease. self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the
J. Clin. Invest. 123, 2730–2736 (2013). terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
336. Meissner, W. G. et al. Trial of lixisenatide in early Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 390,
1176–1185 (2024). © Springer Nature Limited 2024
Nature Reviews Neurology | Volume 21 | January 2025 | 32–47 47

---PAGE BREAK---

