HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2022 June 09; 185(12): 2035–2056.e33. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2022.05.008.
The Parkinson’s disease protein alpha-synuclein is a modulator
of Processing-bodies and mRNA stability
Erinc Hallacli1,2,3, Can Kayatekin3, Sumaiya Nazeen1,2,12,13, Xiou H. Wang1,2, Zoe
Sheinkopf1,2, Shubhangi Sathyakumar1, Souvarish Sarkar4, Xin Jiang5, Xianjun Dong1,
Roberto Di Maio6, Wen Wang7, Matthew T. Keeney6, Daniel Felsky8,9, Jackson Sandoe3,
Aazam Vahdatshoar1,2, Namrata D. Udeshi10, DR Mani10, Steven A. Carr10, Susan
Lindquist3,14,15,†, Philip L. De Jager9, David P. Bartel3,14,15, Chad L. Myers7, J. Timothy
Greenamyre6, Mel B. Feany4, Shamil R. Sunyaev12,13, Chee Yeun Chung5, Vikram
Khurana1,2,10,11,*
1Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
2Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
3Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
4Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.
5Yumanity Therapeutics, Boston, MA 02135, USA.
6Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases and Department of Neurology, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA.
7Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.
8Krembil Centre for Neuroinformatics and Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, ON
M5T 1R8, Canada.
*Correspondence: Vikram Khurana, vkhurana@bwh.harvard.edu.
†Deceased.
Author Contributions
EH, CK, VK conceived of and designed the project. EH and VK wrote the manuscript with input from authors. EH conducted and
analyzed all biochemical and cell-based assays with help from ZS, XHW, SS, AV. CK and EH conducted yeast assays. VK, CYC and
XJ oversaw iPSC reprogramming and genetic corrections with help from Ping Xu. JS constructed the Ngn2 piggyBac plasmid and
cell lines were generated by AV. XD analyzed sequencing data for the mRNA stability experiment. DF, PLD conducted the ROSMAP
analysis. WW, CM conducted the BridGE analysis. RDM, MK and TJG conducted brain PLA. SN, SRS designed and conducted
RVTT analysis. SS and MBF conducted the Drosophila experiments. CYC designed and conducted the SILAC experiments with
NDU, DRM and SAC performing the mass spectrometry and downstream analysis. EH prepared all the figures and analyzed the data
with input from VK (except as otherwise noted).
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review
of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Declaration of Interest
VK is a co-founder of and senior advisor to Dacapo Brainscience and Yumanity Therapeutics, companies focused on CNS diseases.
CYC and XJ contributed to this work as employees of Yumanity Therapeutics.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 2
9Center for Translational & Computational Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology, Columbia
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA
10The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
11Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
12Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
13Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA
02115.
14Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
15Department of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
SUMMARY
Alpha-synuclein (αS) is a conformationally plastic protein that reversibly binds to cellular
membranes. It aggregates and is genetically linked to Parkinson’s disease (PD). Here, we show
that αS directly modulates Processing-bodies (P-bodies), membraneless organelles that function in
mRNA turnover and storage. The N-terminus of αS, but not other synucleins, dictates mutually
exclusive binding either to cellular membranes or to P-bodies in the cytosol. αS associates
with multiple decapping proteins in close proximity on the Edc4 scaffold. As αS pathologically
accumulates, aberrant interaction with Edc4 occurs at the expense of physiologic decapping-
module interactions. mRNA-decay kinetics within PD-relevant pathways are correspondingly
disrupted in PD patient neurons and brain. Genetic modulation of P-body components alters αS
toxicity, and human genetic analysis lends support to the disease-relevance of these interactions.
Beyond revealing an unexpected aspect of αS function and pathology, our data highlight the
versatility of conformationally plastic proteins with high intrinsic disorder.
Graphical Abstract
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 3
In Brief
Alpha-synuclein modulates mRNA stability to regulate gene expression with implications for
understanding both normal cellular physiology and vulnerability to Parkinson’s disease and related
disorders.
INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder
(Marras et al., 2018). PD is a multisystem disease associated with a plethora of motor and
nonmotor manifestations. Pathologically, these phenotypes are associated with widespread
intraneuronal protein aggregates called Lewy bodies (LBs) from the gut to the neocortex.
(Goedert et al., 2012; Shulman et al., 2011). The first familial PD cases were attributed
to a point mutation (A53>T) at the SNCA locus (Polymeropoulos et al., 1997) encodes a
14kDA protein alpha-synuclein (αS) that was identified as the major component of LBs
in PD and related “synucleinopathies” (Spillantini et al., 1997). Notably, human genetic
studies also suggested an exquisite sensitivity of neurons to the levels of wild-type αS
protein: multiplication of the wild-type SNCA gene locus causes early-onset forms of
PD and dementia (Singleton et al., 2003) and common polymorphisms that marginally
increase SNCA expression are sufficient to increase risk for late-onset PD(Chang et al.,
2017; Soldner et al., 2016).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 4
The function of αS remains elusive. It is vertebrate-specific and highly expressed in
neurons, reaching micromolar concentrations in synaptic boutons (Wilhelm et al., 2014).
It adopts an amphipathic helical structure when it associates with phospholipid membranes
at the cytosolic face of vesicles (Auluck et al., 2010). The most agreed-upon functions
of αS include a regulatory role in vesicular trafficking and vesicle fusion (Hunn et al.,
2016), chaperoning function for synaptic SNARE complexes(Burré et al., 2018) and in
mitochondrial and lysosomal homeostasis(Nguyen et al., 2019). However, αS is found in
cell compartments beyond the synapse or membrane, including the nucleus(Kontopoulos
et al., 2006; Schaser et al., 2019) and soma (Pei and Maitta, 2019). Diverse biophysical
forms are described, ranging from a soluble disordered form to dynamic multimers
and self-templating amyloid fibrils (Dettmer et al., 2016; Jarosz and Khurana, 2017).
αS knockout mice have relatively modest neurophysiologic deficits and normal lifespan,
perhaps reflecting redundancy with two other synuclein family members, beta- and gamma-
synuclein, neither of which is definitively associated with PD(Cabin et al., 2002; Greten-
Harrison et al., 2010). Moreover, αS is highly expressed in several non-neuronal tissues such
as blood, kidney, and adipose tissue(Bozic et al., 2020; Locascio et al., 2015; Uhlen et al.,
2015). These findings suggest as-yet-undiscovered functions and interactions for αS.
Previously, we demonstrated considerable overlap between genetic modifiers of αS
cytotoxicity and its neighboring proteome in neurons(Chung et al., 2013; Khurana et al.,
2017) , thus tying the physiologic function of αS to the toxicity that results from its
accumulation (Lam et al., 2020). Beyond vesicle trafficking, the most frequent proteins in
these αS “maps” were RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and ribosomal subunits. While human
genetic studies in PD have consistently implicated vesicle-trafficking genes, most of the
heritability of PD is as yet unexplained. Larger common and rare-variant analyses(Bandres-
Ciga et al., 2020; Chartier-Harlin et al., 2011; Siitonen et al., 2017) increasingly implicate
diverse pathways in the disease, including mRNA metabolism(Chang et al., 2017) but the
biochemical basis of these genetic risk modifiers and whether these seemingly disparate
pathways are inter-connected remains unclear.
Here, we report that αS modulates Processing body (P-body) complexes and mRNA
stability in the cytosol. P-bodies are a major hub for RNA metabolism in eukaryotic cells.
They comprise RNA and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) involved in mRNA decapping and
degradation, mRNA storage and RNAi silencing (Corbet and Parker, 2020). We find that αS
interacts closely with a core set of proteins (Edc4, Dcp1, Dcp2, Xrn1, Edc3) involved in
mRNA-decapping and degradation. This interaction is dictated by the N-terminus of αS, the
same region involved in membrane anchoring. αS thus dichotomously interacts with either
membranes or P-body components. Of these components, αS interacts most strongly with
Edc4, the decapping-module scaffold. When αS levels increases to pathological levels, Edc4
increasingly associates with αS, compromising interactions with other decapping-module
proteins. This is seen in human neurons harboring familial synucleinopathy mutations, both
iPSC-derived and in postmortem brain. Human genetic analyses further tie this pathway to
PD risk. In human neurons that express pathologic levels of αS or that are seeded with
αS fibrils, mRNAs are globally stabilized. Our data suggest how altered αS membrane
interactions and pathology might directly impact other key cytosolic functions, including
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 5
mRNA metabolism. More broadly, these data shed light on mechanisms through which
conformationally plastic proteins like αS can mediate cross-compartment signaling in cells.
RESULTS
P-body genes modify αS toxicity in tractable model organisms
Prior screens in cellular PD models tied αS to multiple RNA-binding protein (RBP)
networks (Chung et al., 2017; Khurana et al., 2017). To determine which pathways were
most perturbed by αS toxicity and how specific these perturbations were to αS compared to
other neurodegeneration (ND) related proteins, we turned to a well-controlled screenable
yeast platform called RBP-yTRAP (yeast Transcriptional Reporting of Aggregating
Proteins) (Newby et al., 2017). Here, the perturbation on any RBP emerges as a fluorescent
output through a synthetic transcription factor. Upon a genetic or chemical challenge, the
yTRAP platform measures perturbations of 168 RBPs in intact cells by high-throughput
flow cytometry (Fig.1A, Star Methods).
To detect RBP perturbations in response to ND proteins, we generated yeast strains that
express untagged versions of either αS, Tdp-43, Fus and Sod14AV under an estradiol
induction system. Fus, Tdp-43 and SOD1 are all implicated in ALS, and Fus and Tdp-43
yeast models have proved informative for understanding aspects of ALS biology (Fushimi et
al., 2011; Hayden et al., 2020; Ju et al., 2011). Acute induction of αS, Fus and Tdp-43 each
resulted in marked toxicity. Fus-toxicity was matched to that of αS (Supp.Fig.1A) and thus
served as a control for ND specifivity. Expression of Sod14AV was non-toxic (Supp.Fig.1A)
and was used as a non-toxic control. We crossed the yeast ND models to the yTRAP
platform and measured RBP perturbations upon estradiol induction of each ND protein
(Fig.1A), performed in biological triplicate after optimization (Supp.Fig.1B,C). Surprisingly,
the largest changes in yTRAP sensors were induced by αS expression and not by Fus
(Fig.1B). Despite equivalent cytotoxicity of αS and Fus, the respective yTRAP signals were
highly distinct (Supp.Fig.1D), implying that the consequences of ND proteotoxicity on RBP
biology are highly specific.
Rrt5 and Sgn1 were the most perturbed RBPs upon αS toxicity (Fig.1B, p<0.001). Rrt5
is under-studied with no clear human homolog (Hontz et al., 2009). Sgn1 is a cytoplasmic
polyA-binding protein (PABP) family member, which physically and genetically interacts
with Pab1/Pabpc1 and translation initiation factors Tif4631/2 (Winstall et al., 2000). Guided
by Sgn1’s immediate connection to the polyA tail and translation initiation, we chose
39 genes (TableS1) connected to polyA-tail turnover, translation initiation and mRNA-
cap biology and performed targeted-overexpression, deletion and yTRAP screen in the
αS toxicity model (Fig.1C-E). In the over-expression screen, eight suppressors of αS
toxicity were recovered, including Pab1 and Tif4631/2, known from previous screens
(Khurana et al., 2017), but among these suppressors, Pan2/3 polyA ribonucleases were
the strongest (Fig.1C, Supp.Fig1E). Notably, these modifiers did not appreciably change
αS protein levels (Supp.Fig.1G) and none of them rescued Fus toxicity (Supp.Fig 1F).
Dcp2, Not3 and Lsm7 emerged as αS toxicity modifiers in the deletion screen (Fig.1D).
The focused yTRAP screen revealed several proteins were specifically perturbed by αS
expression (and not by Fus): Edc1 and 2, Not1,3,5,Ccr4 (Ccr-Not complex member), Eif4e
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 6
(cap-binding protein), Lsm4,6 (Lsm Ring) and the Pan2 nuclease (Fig.1E, Supp.Fig.1H).
Taken together, our strongest genetic and yTRAP hits are all involved in regulation of
mRNA degradation (summarized in Fig. 1F). In eukaryotes, these machinaries (polyA-tail
shortening, decapping, enhancers of decapping and deadenylation) localize to membraneless
organelles known as Processing bodies or P-bodies (Decker and Parker, 2012).
To verify this connection in a metazoan model organism with a complex nervous system,
we turned to a Drosophila melanogaster synucleinopathy model, in which αS expression in
the brain elicits neurodegeneration and loss of locomotor activity(Feany and Bender, 2000;
Olsen and Feany, 2019). A recent screen of these phenotypes performed at genome-scale
(~5000 genes, Dey and Feany, in preparation) included 34 P-body related genes. Of nine
modifier-hits in this pathway, our attention was drawn to a strong hit, the key P-body 5’>3’
ribonuclease PCM/XRN1. We proceeded to secondary validation experiments for this gene
(Fig. 1G). Two independent RNAi stocks validated that brain-specific knock down of XRN1
exacerbated the locomotor deficiency of αS expressing flies. The severity of this phenotype
correlated with KD efficiency (Fig.1H), and no change in αS protein levels accompanied
this modification (Supp. Fig. 1I). Thus, P-body components involved in mRNA degradation
are strong and specific modulators of αS-mediated toxicity and this effect is evolutionarily
conserved.
αS physically interacts with P-body components with a high affinity towards Edc4
To understand the biochemical basis of these genetic interactions, we turned to HEK293
cells, which endogenously express αS(Lee and Kamitani, 2011). We first epitope-tagged
αS with GFP to avoid conformational recognition bias with antibodies (Supp.Fig.2A). We
C-terminally tagged αS as the N-terminus is important for its membrane interactions(Fusco
et al., 2018). We measured αS-specific protein interactions with quantitative SILAC
mass spectrometry (MS) after GFP pulldown in αS-GFP versus control GFP stable lines
(Fig.2A,B). Of the top 29 αS interactors (Fig.2C; TableS2), four P-body proteins (Edc3,
Edc4, Dcp1, Dcp2) were recovered. These proteins form the ‘decapping module’, which
removes the 5’ cap from mRNA (by Dcp2), enabling subsequent 5’ to 3’ mRNA degradation
by Xrn1. Other top hits included proteins previously tied to αS and PD biology, such as
VapA and VapB (Paillusson et al., 2017).
The large size of GFP (27 KDa) relative to αS (14 KDa) might alter its interactions. We
thus used the small Avi tag (15aa), which can be biotinylated by E.coli BirA ligase (Ioannou
et al., 2018). We generated constructs that co-expressed αS-Avi and BirA ligase and stably
inserted them into a single FRT site (Fig.2D, HEK293 Flp-In lines). Streptavidin pulldown
from extracts yielded highly pure and biotinylation-specific αS enrichments (Supp.Fig.2B,
Fig.2F). Probing of endogenous P-body components revealed Edc4, Dcp1, Dcp2, Edc3
co-purifications and slight enrichments for Ddx6 and Lsm14A (Fig.2E). In contrast, the core
stress granule components G3bp1 and Eif4e did not co-purify with αS (Fig.2E). Interactions
between Edc3 or Edc4 and αS were able to withstand 0.5M salt and RNAse digestions.
In contrast, interaction with the RNA helicase Ddx6 was rapidly lost in these conditions
(Supp.Fig.2C, D).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 7
In our αS pulldowns, Edc4 showed consistently the highest enrichment among decapping-
module proteins and, along with αS, it had the highest peptide count in SILAC MS
(Supp.Fig.2E). Silver staining of αS-Avi pulldowns (Fig.2F) revealed a strong 150
KDa band (the expected size of Edc4) which was lost in an EDC4 null background
(Fig.2G). Mass-spectrometry analysis confirmed its identity (TableS2). To determine if this
affinity was unique to Edc4 among P-body proteins, we tagged ~50 P-body proteins by
nanoluciferase and quantified their interactions with αS under over-expression conditions.
Multiple interactions were noted (such as Dcp2, Tnrc6a) but Edc4 was the strongest
(Fig.2H). We co-expressed αS and Edc4 in Sf9 insect cells with baculovirus-mediated
expression. αS could pull down Edc4 in this In vitro system (Fig.2l). αS thus physically
associates with decapping-module proteins and, among these, has highest affinity towards
Edc4.
Condensed P-body granules are not required for αS interactions
Proteomic analysis of large, condensed P-body granules did not identify αS as a component
(Hubstenberger et al., 2017). Furthermore, our immunofluorescence (IF) studies failed to
localize αS within microscopically visible “macro” P-bodies (not shown). Interactions
between αS and decapping interactions could occur in sub-diffraction limited cytosolic
complexes, soluble pools of P-body proteins, or “micro P-bodies.” We fractionated
macro and micro P-bodies according to the Hubstenberger protocol (Supp.Fig2F). As
expected, decapping proteins were recovered in macro P-bodies. However, αS and
the majority of the decapping proteins co-fractioned with micro P-bodies even after
solubilization with nucleases (Supp.Fig.2G). When we knocked out Ddx6, essential for
P-body condensation(Stefano et al., 2019) (Fig. 2J), condensed macro P-bodies did not form.
However, Edc4 and Edc3 protein levels were unchanged (Fig.2J) and αS still interacted with
P-body components under these conditions (Fig.2J). Thus, αS associates with the soluble
decapping modules.
The αS N-terminus dictates dichotomous interactions with membranes or P-body proteins
We investigated how affinity of αS towards membranes affects its decapping-module
interactions. Upon contact with membranes, αS rapidly forms alpha-helices throughout its
N-terminal lipid-binding domain (~1-100 aa, NLD) and the acidic C-terminal tail projects
from the membrane as a random coil engaged in protein interactions (Snead and Eliezer,
2019) (Fig.3A). Serial truncations of C-terminus of αS did not impair decapping interactions
(Supp. Fig3A) so we generated sequential 10 aa deletions of αS spanning the NLD. There
was a marked loss in decapping-module binding when the first or second 10 aa segment of
αS was deleted (Fig. 3B-C). As the first 20 aa of αS is responsible for its initial anchoring to
membranes and propagation of the helical structure along the NLD (Fusco et al., 2014), we
hypothesized that the N-terminus of αS dictates a dichotomous binding: αS interacts with
either membranes or the decapping module. To investigate this prediction, we performed a
thorough mutational analysis of αS.
Familial PD point mutations in the αS N-terminal sequence alter its membrane-binding
propensity, either increasing (E46K) or decreasing (A30P, G51D) affinity (Dettmer, 2018).
The structural basis of this membrane avidity is due to the imperfect repeats of 11 aa
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 8
motifs in the N-terminus(Das and Eliezer, 2019). These repeats topologically align with
αS’s 11-3 helicity (11 aa in 3 turns) on the membrane (Fig. 3D, “wheel” representation).
Thus, composite point mutations can be rationally designed along αS’s helix surface to
exaggerate the biophysical phenotype exerted by the single familial PD point mutations
(Dettmer, 2018). We found that the interaction with the decapping module was preserved in
the membrane-averse A30P and G51D mutants, as well as their rationally extended surface
mutants (Fig. 3E). However, while individual E>K mutants (E35K, E46K, E61K) did not
influence P-body binding, the composite highly membrane-avid 3K mutant abrogated it
(Fig. 3F, surface3, Lane11).
While no PD mutations have been found in threonine residues deep in the bilayer (Fig.3D,
Surface3), substitution of these threonines with hydrophobic (high membrane-affinity)
leucines (Perrin et al., 2000) resulted in a complete loss of decapping-module interactions
(Fig. 3F; Lane12). A double T>L mutant (T59L, T81L) was sufficient to replicate this
loss (Fig.3G) but when exchanged with membrane-repelling hydrophilic residues (T>E and
T>K), decapping-module binding was restored to wild-type levels (Supp.Fig.3C). Thus,
membrane-bound αS does not appear to interact with decapping module proteins.
It is formally possible that αS requires the N-terminus only to bind to membranes and
undergo a conformational change, which in turn allows decapping-module binding in the
cytosol. To exclude this possibility, we utilized a mutant of αS that never binds membranes
(T44P, A89P) (Burré et al., 2015)and expressed it with or without the first 10 aa (Δ2-10).
We observed that this mutant interacted with decapping components but completely lost this
interaction when lacking the first 10aa (Fig.3H). Our data suggest that the αS N-terminus
directly binds to the decapping-module away from phospholipid membranes.
Among the closely related proteins, alpha-, beta- and gamma-synuclein only αS is
definitively linked to PD. Despite the relative conservation at the N-terminus (Supp.Fig3E),
only αS binds to decapping proteins (Fig.3I). Substitution of only 5 aa residues that
distinguish gamma-synuclein from αS within the first 20 aa resulted in a complete loss
of decapping-module binding to αS (Fig.3J). We propose that the very specific sequence of
αS N-terminus dictates dichotomous binding either to membranes or to P-body (Fig.3K).
αS interacts with multiple decapping-module proteins on the proximal scaffold of Edc4.
The “proximal” region of the Edc4’s C-terminus (974-1265 aa) orchestrates decapping-
module assembly (Fig. 4A) (Chang et al., 2014). Other regions of the protein mediate
different nuclear and mitochondrial functions(Gudkova et al., 2012; Hernández et al.,
2018). First, we confirmed that there was co-abundance of decapping proteins and αS
in cytoplasmic rather than nuclear fractions (Supp.Fig.4D). Next, systematic deletion and
truncation analysis of Edc4 indicated that αS does in fact bind to the proximal region of
Edc4 (Edc4: 974-1237aa) (Fig.4B,C, Supp.Fig.4A-C). A finer deletion analysis pinpointed a
conserved block between aa 1220 and 1240 (Block 4, Fig.4D). Thus, the interactions of αS
with Edc4 are likely linked to its canonical P-body function.
To identify where other decapping-module proteins associate with Edc4 in relationship to
the αS interaction site, we pulled down HA-tagged Edc4 (and its deletion mutants) in
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 9
an EDC4-knockout line. We then probed for other decapping-module proteins. Dcp1-Edc3
binding to Edc4, but not Xrn1, commenced at Edc4 residues 1099-1166 (Fig. 4E). When
we extended the Edc4 sequence to include the αS-binding site, Edc3 and Dcp1 bound even
more avidly than they did to the full-length Edc4 protein and Xrn1 binding was also detected
(Fig.4E). The Edc4 Block4 region was required for the optimal binding of Dcp1 and Edc3
(Fig.4E lower, Supp.Fig.4F). αS therefore interacted with Edc4 exactly where Edc4 binds to
other key decapping-module proteins.
To address whether the full integration of αS into the decapping complex involves
decapping proteins other than Edc4, we knocked out by CRISPR/Cas9 the three decapping
proteins for which we had the best antibodies: Edc4, Dcp1 and Edc3. We then re-evaluated
Avi-tagged αS’s interaction with endogenous decapping proteins in these null cell lines (Fig.
4F; Supp.Fig.4G-l). Each decapping-protein knockout reduced interaction of αS with each
of the other decapping-module proteins to varying degrees (Fig. 4F). Edc4 was the most
critical component (Fig.4F). Thus, the full integration of αS into the decapping module
requires other decapping proteins besides Edc4 (Fig.4G).
αS gene dosage modulates P-body biology in human neurons
αS is highly enriched in human neurons, the cell type most consistently implicated in
synucleinopathies. Our fly data suggested P-body manipulation in neurons can change a
functional motor outcome (Fig.1). We predicted that direct interactions between P-body
components and αS occur in human neurons. We turned to the so-called “Iowa kindred”
in whom a dominantly inherited triplication of the SNCA locus leads to dementia and
parkinsonism associated with LB neuropathology (Hurtig et al., 2000; Singleton et al.,
2003). Through somatic-cell reprogramming to iPSCs and differentiation, we and others
have identified early neuronal pathologies attributable to αS dosage (Byers et al., 2011;
Chung et al., 2013; Mazzulli et al., 2016). We investigated P-body biology in response to
altered αS dosage in neurons in pure populations of cortical glutamatergic neurons (“iNs”)
induced from iPSCs by forced expression of the Ngn2 transcription factor(Zhang et al.,
2013).
We obtained iPSC reprogrammed from a female Iowan kindred patient (Star Methods) and
confirmed the genotype (Supp.Fig.5A). We generated an isogenic allelic series of iPSCs
through a CRISPR/Cas9 approach (Fig.5A; Supp.Fig.5B,C). We selected clones in which
sequencing across the SNCA locus indicated disruption of 2 alleles or 4 SNCA alleles
(Supp.Fig.5D). For scalable, virus-free and consistent generation of neurons, we transposed
into the iPSC lines an all-in-one PiggyBac (pB) vector that enabled doxycycline (dox)-
inducible expression of Ngn2 (Fig.5A, lower schematic). We made multiple modifications in
this vector to ensure stable and high expression-levels of the transgene cargo (Star Methods).
A pure population of neurons was generated within two weeks of dox induction (Fig.5C,
Supp.Fig.5E). Western blot confirmed in these neurons the presence of pathologic (4-copy
parental), wild-type (2-copy knockdown), and null (0-copy knockout) levels of the αS
protein (Fig.5B).
To assess physical interactions between αS and decapping-module proteins, we generated
a pB vector that enabled dox-inducible expression of Ngn2 and αS-Avi. BirA ligase
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 10
was concomitantly expressed under the (postmitotic neuron-specific) synapsin promoter
(Fig.5C,E). This pB vector was stably introduced into our SNCA complete knockout iPSC
to avoid confounding effects of endogenous αS. Pull-down by streptavidin beads recovered
Edc4 and other decapping-module components in the αS-Avi-expressing neurons, but not
in the untagged αS condition. Thus, αS also interacts with the decapping module in human
neurons (Fig.5E).
To exclude artefacts induced by αS over-expression, we adapted the proximity ligation assay
(PLA). PLA utilizes oligonucleotide-hybridized antibodies to detect close protein-protein
interactions in situ (Maio et al., 2016). We first confirmed that Edc4 puncta co-localized
with Dcp1 (Supp.Fig5F) and that Edc4 generated a true positive PLA signal with Dcp1
(Supp.Fig.6G) in 2copy SNCA iNs. Next, we quantitatively measured PLA signal between
Edc4 and αS with automated microscopy. Not only was there a positive PLA signal between
Edc4 and αS in iNs, but there was a clear linear relationship between αS levels and the PLA
foci counts (Fig.5F, Supp.Fig.5G,H). Thus, αS interacts with Edc4 in situ in human neurons
and this interaction is proportionate with αS levels.
While αS interacts with micro rather than macro P-bodies (Fig. 2J), increased αS levels
could alter macro P-bodies if an equilibrium exists between micro and macro compartments.
Consistent with this possibility, pathologic levels of αS (4-copy) result in decreased P-body
numbers compared to wild-type levels of αS (2-copy) (Fig.5G, Supp.Fig.5 I, J). We asked
if the same change was induced by a disease-causing point mutation in αS(Soldner et
al., 2016) We and others previously reported on cellular pathologies in neurons harboring
the A53>T αS mutation(Chung et al., 2013; Khurana et al., 2017; Ryan et al., 2013).
We rederived this iPSC line and performed genetic correction with CRISPR/Cas9 (exon-3
targeting guide RNA and repair template; see Star Methods). These lines were also targeted
with PiggyBac Ngn2 constructs and transdifferentiated to cortical neurons (Fig. 5A). At
3-4 weeks, exactly as in triplication neurons, P-body numbers decreased in SNCA A53>T
mutant neurons compared to their isogenically corrected controls (Fig.5H). Thus, in human
neurons, P-body homeostasis is altered by either amplification or disease-associated point
mutations of αS.
αS upregulation disrupts Edc4 complexes
αS associates with Edc4 at a key region where multiple decapping-module proteins bind
(Fig. 4). Thus, pathologic accumulation of αS could alter mRNA metabolism by directly
disrupting P-body composition. Consistent with this idea, in HEK293 cells that expressed
αS under a dox-inducible promoter, the endogenous Edc4-Dcp1 interaction (measured by
co-IP) decreased as αS levels increased (Fig.6A, Supp.Fig.6A). In an orthogonal assay, we
optimized native PAGE to capture high-molecular weight Edc4 and Edc3 protein complexes
that are nuclease resistant, closely mimicking the micro P-bodies (Supp.Fig.6B-F and
Star Methods). In this assay, the amount of high-molecular weight native Edc4 and Edc3
complexes diminished as αS levels increased (Fig.6B).
To connect these findings more closely to human PD pathophysiology, we turned once
more to the SNCA triplication series iNs (Fig.5A). We compared the in-situ interactions
between Edc4 and Dcp1 (by PLA) in SNCA 4-copy and isogenic SNCA 2-copy neurons.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 11
Edc4-Dcp1 PLA signal in SNCA 4-copy neurons was significantly less than the signal
in 2-copy neurons (Fig.6C, Supp.Fig.6G). Importantly, Dcp1 and Edc4 protein levels
remained unchanged (Fig.6D). Thus, upregulated levels of αS can disrupt decapping-module
composition also in a disease-relevant context.
αS upregulation perturbs mRNA decay dynamics
If pathologic levels of αS disrupts endogenous decapping-module integrity, mRNA-decay
kinetics could also be disrupted. We tested if αS can modulate mRNA stability by tethering
it to an mRNA reporter (λN-boxB system)(Keryer-Bibens et al., 2008). We generated a dual
mRNA-tether reporter system that enables a ratiometric luminescence readout of mRNA
abundance (Supp.Fig.6H). As expected, tethering of P-body proteins, including Edc4, to λN
resulted in decay of the reporter (Fig. 6E; Supp.Fig.6I). Bringing αS proximal to the reporter
recapitulated this trend, suggesting αS can mimic bona fide mRNA degradation proteins
(Fig.6E).
Turning to the more disease-relevant human neuronal model, we compared genome-wide
mRNA decay kinetics between SNCA 4-copy and 2-copy neurons. We confirmed that at
baseline (time=0), SNCA was differentially expressed between the lines, consistent with the
genotypes (Fig.6G). If the decapping module is compromised, SNCA 4-copy neurons would
have compromised mRNA degradation and thus slower mRNA decay rates compared to 2-
copy SNCA. We thus measured mRNA levels up to 12 hours from transcriptional inhibition
by ActinomycinD (ActD) (Fig. 6F). The decay rate for any mRNA in any time-interval
can be represented as the log fold expression change during that interval. In down-sloping
(decaying) genes, the difference between 2copy and 4copy log2FC (the “Δslope 2c-4c” in Fig.
6H-I) is predicted to be negative.
The most robust alterations in mRNA decay rates between the genotypes occurred in the
first hour after ActD addition (Δslope t1-t0; 1204 genes with differential slopes, likelihood
ratio test (LRT), FDR<0.05)(Fig.6I, Supp.Fig.6J). Robust enrichments in genes related
to protein targeting, mRNA translation initiation and mRNA catabolism was observed
when gene-ontology analysis was conducted (Supp. Fig.6K). In the ‘protein targeting”
category, aside from ribosomal genes, 9 out 28 genes (AP3D1, CLU, GABARAP, HSPA8,
LAMP2, PIKFYVE, RAB8B, SCARB2, VPS13A, VPS13D) have previously been linked
to PD (TableS6). More importantly, a preponderance of these transcripts (709/1204)
exhibited Δslope 2c-4c<0 (Fig.6I, green sector and right panel) in line with our prediction
of compromised decapping.
We broadened our analysis to all decaying genes in the SNCA 2-copy neurons (regardless
of LRT significance). Slope distributions for these genes were visualized as a histogram
where the Δslope 2c-4c<0 genes are on the left (red) and the Δslope 2c-4c>0, genes are on the
right(blue) (Fig.6J). When we compared all the 9561 decaying genes in a pairwise slope
analysis, we noted a preponderance of genes exhibiting Δslope 2c-4c<0 (Fig.6J, p=5.8 e-09).
We examined mRNA kinetics in the presence or absence of αS pre-formed fibrils (PFFs).
PFFs are frequently used to induce αS aggregation pathology (Volpicelli-Daley et al., 2014).
Addition of PFFs to the 2-copy neurons phenocopied the same global effect of mRNA
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 12
stabilization as increasing αS copy-number (Fig.6K, n=10061 genes, p=0.00042). However,
addition of PFFs to the 4-copy SNCA neurons had no detectable effect on the kinetics
of decaying genes (Fig.6L, n=9647 genes, p=0.99). These global trends were replicated
for the second time interval (1-3 hrs) as well, but not for non-decaying (up-regulated)
genes(Supp.Fig.6L-N). Thus, pathophysiologic of levels of αS can lead to disruption of the
decapping-module and aberrant stabilization of mRNAs (Fig.6M).
αS accumulation in synucleinopathy brain is associated with perturbed mRNA metabolism
and decapping-module disruption
iPSC-derived iNs are a disease-relevant model for investigating the early pathologies of
synucleinopathy. We extended our investigation of perturbed mRNA metabolism to human
postmortem brain tissue. To address whether altered mRNA metabolism occurs as αS
accumulates in the brain, we turned to the Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging
Project (Bennett et al., 2018). ROSMAP is a population-based study in which detailed
measures of postmortem neuropathology can be directly related to a multitude of clinical
and molecular phenotypes. We analyzed mRNA abundance in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC)(Mostafavi et al., 2018). DLPFC is matched to our iPSC cortical neuron model, but
also a region with relatively early PD pathology, thus avoiding end-stage neuronal and glial
responses.
We assessed statistically significant correlation/anti-correlation with four phenotypes related
to PD and synucleinopathy (clinical PD diagnosis, clinical PD severity, presence of LB
pathology, degree of Lewy LB pathology; n =573-595) (Supp.Fig.7A). GO terms
range
related to RNA metabolism were enriched with respect to each of these four phenotypes
(unbiased FDR correction; adjusted p-value<0.05) (Supp.Fig.7A with enrichment shown
across different ontologies and specifically for the “degree of LB pathology” phenotype
in Fig.7B). These findings suggest that, chronically in the brain, with increasing severity
and advancement of αS neuropathology, RNA metabolism is perturbed in addition to well-
known PD pathology pathways such as protein folding, mitochondrial-stress and ER protein
localization. Interestingly, these pathways were similarly over-represented in our neuronal
RNA kinetics experiments (Supp.Fig. 6K).
If the ROSMAP expression profile changes reflect a response to αS accumulation, then
disruption of the decapping-module ought to be apparent in human brain, just as we
observed it in human synucleinopathy neurons (Fig.6C-D). To match our iPSC analysis,
we sourced rare familial synucleinopathy (SNCA duplication and SNCA A53T mutation)
brain tissue (TableS7). We performed PLA analysis between αS and Edc4, as well as Edc4
and Dcp1. We selected the frontal cortex to match our iPSC and ROSMAP analyses, and
to avoid the confounders noted above. In patient brains, compared to control brains, αS-
Edc4 interactions significantly increased when measured by PLA (Fig. 7C,D, Supp.Fig7D).
However, as in patient-derived neurons, the Dcp1-Edc4 interaction was concomitantly
lost (Fig. 7E-F), without any change in levels of Dcp1 or Edc4 (Supp.Fig.7B, E). Thus,
decapping module integrity is also compromised in synucleinopathy patient brains.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 13
Two human genetic analyses identify a disease risk signal related to P-body genes in
sporadic PD
To extend our findings beyond familial synucleinopathy to patients with so-called “sporadic”
PD, we turned to human genetic analysis. Population-based GWAS studies have been
instrumental in identifying causal genetic drivers of disease phenotype, however, most
PD heritability remains unexplained(Keller et al., 2012). GWAS have implicated one P-
body gene, LSM7, that is in linkage with a genome-wide significant single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) rs62120679 (Chang et al., 2017). Most previous GWAS analyses have
focused on single-variant tests, which identify individual genes contributing to disease risk.
While identifying cumulative genetic changes in a pathway is often underpowered in GWAS
analysis, directing analysis to a biologically meaningful genetic space, such as a pathway
or well-defined network, can increase power (Bandres-Ciga et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2017). We performed two analyses geared to determine whether cumulative
genetic changes in the P-body pathway are associated with PD risk. We considered P-body
proteins a good candidate ontological network for such interactions.
To explore the space of common variants in P-body genes and SNCA, we applied a method
known as BridGE(Fang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017). BridGE can be used to identify
enrichment in the statistical signal of association in a predetermined set of biologically
interacting genes (e.g., pathways or protein complexes) based on GWAS cohort data.
Pathway-level analyses with BridGE can enhance statistical power when the genes included
in the pathway have association signals that are undetectable individually.
In seven independent PD case-control cohorts (TableS7; Star Methods), we used BridGE
to interrogate SNPs linked to SNCA and a canonical set of 53 P-body genes (Fig.7G,H).
We focused on high confidence statistical signals (FDR<0.1) in one cohort and replicated
in at least two independent cohorts (sample permutation p-value<0.05) (Star Methods).
In total, we identified 76 significant signals for gene pairs among SNCA and P-body
genes (TableS7), 23 of which included SNCA (Fig. 7H). These genes comprised multiple
pathways, reminiscent of interactions we had identified in our systematic yeast genetic
screen (Fig. 1C-F). The three most inter-connected genes (or “hubs”) of the resultant
network were SNCA, SMG7 and LSM7. As noted above, LSM7 is in linkage with a SNP
previously implicated in PD at genome-wide significance that regulates LSM7 expression
(rs62120679)(Chang et al., 2017). Importantly, the result was specific. When we applied
the same method to the same set of 53 P-body genes in four ALS cohorts (TableS7), there
was only a single significant gene pair that included a P-body gene and TDP-43 and none
with FUS, along with reduced intra P-body gene pairs (Fig.7G, TableS7). Thus, biological
interactions between SNCA and P-body genes are specifically associated with PD risk.
To assess whether an accumulation of rare variants in key P-body genes might confer risk
of PD in humans, we performed a pathway-level rare-variant burden test in two case-control
whole-genome sequencing datasets from AMP-PD (Accelerating Medicines Partnership for
PD), namely, PDBP and PPMI. After quality filtering, PPMI and PDBP datasets comprised
572 (PD: 391, Control: 181) and 1273 (PD: 823, Control: 450) individuals, respectively
(STAR Methods). With these modest sample sizes, traditional rare variant association tests
that collapse variants at the gene level lack of statistical power. Moreover, if a standard test
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 14
(like SKAT-O) is adapted such that genes within a pathway are considered a “mega-gene”,
no distinction is made between one variant in that mega-gene or many. To address this issue,
we recently developed a pathway-based association test, namely, the rare variant trend test
(RVTT), that assesses the relationship of the frequency of qualifying variants in a pathway
with disease risk leveraging the Cochran-Armitage test statistic (Bendapudi et al., 2022).
If a pathway is implicated in a disease, we are likely to see an accumulation of qualifying
rare variants in the pathway in cases compared to controls(Fig.7G). RVTT selects qualifying
rare variants using a variable minor allele frequency threshold approach(Price et al., 2010),
and measures the strength of association using permutation-based p-values. A strength of
the method is the ability to compare variants predicted to be deleterious versus variants
predicted to be neutral (e.g., synonymous variants).
We divided genes into CORE and DECAPPING modules (STAR Methods) and used RVTT
to test the enrichment of rare qualifying variants in these modules (Fig. 7H). In the PDBP
cohort, we found that PD patients were enriched in rare-damaging (perm p-val=0.027) and
damaging-missense (perm p-val = 0.013) variants in the core P-body genes compared to
controls. In contrast, there was no difference in synonymous (perm p-val=0.557) or neutral
(perm p-val=0.489) rare variants. This trend was recapitulated for damaging-missense
variants (perm p-val = 0.045) in PPMI, in which there was also no difference in synonymous
(perm p-val=0.633) or neutral (perm p-val=0.217) rare variants. Regarding the decapping-
module, there was a trend in the larger PDBP dataset (perm p-val= 0.053; synonymous
variants perm p-val=0.351) but none noted in PPMI (Fig. 7H; TableS7). These results
suggest that a cumulative effect of protein altering variants in key P-body genes potentially
contributes to the PD risk even when individual variants and genes do not associate with the
disease.
DISCUSSION
Despite decades of intense research, αS has continued to surprise. Its connection to PD
and other neurodegenerative synucleinopathies has drawn most attention to its role at the
vesicle membrane, particularly at the presynaptic terminal of neurons. Here, we uncover
a role for αS in the cytosol as a regulator of P-body homeostasis through binding to the
decapping module. Our data provide a way to conceptualize how effects of αS on membrane
trafficking can affect P-body function. This is because αS utilizes the same stretch of
N-terminal amino acids for membrane anchoring(Fusco et al., 2014) as it does for binding
the decapping module (Fig.6). Thus, factors affecting αS residency on the membrane,
including membrane composition, fluidity and rigidity, could affect how available αS
is for decapping-module interactions. This in turn could lead to alterations of mRNA
stability through affecting composition and function of the physiologic decapping module.
Interestingly, another small protein, the 7kDa microprotein NBDY, also regulates P-body
physiology through an interaction with Edc4 (D’Lima et al., 2016). We posit that αS could
act as a ‘cross-compartmental envoy’ and that some of its known genetic interactions with
membrane trafficking and mRNA metabolism genes (Khurana et al., 2017; (Dhungel et al.,
2015) could be explained through this dual residency. In future studies, it will be worth
exploring whether these interactions play a role in synaptic functions, including memory
formation, that heavily depend on post-transcriptional gene regulation.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 15
It is worth noting that the classes of mRNAs stabilized with αS accumulation belong to the
pathways that we and others have previously tied to αS biology in genetic screens, namely
protein trafficking and mRNA metabolism (Supp Fig. 6K), and stabilized genes including
protein trafficking genes implicated in PD GWAS (SCARB2 and VPS13) (Fowler et al.,
2020; Gonçalves et al., 2016; Khurana et al., 2017; Mitchell et al., 2021; Murphy et al.,
2015; Nalls et al., 2019). In postmortem brain, these transcript classes are also altered with
αS accumulation (Fig. 7B). Thus, altered P-body homeostasis may in turn feedback to other
PD-relevant cellular alterations. It is tempting to speculate that some of these transcriptional
changes may even sense and protect against the cytosolic accumulation of αS that occurs in
synucleinopathies (Dettmer et al., 2016).
The critical role of the N-terminus of αS in the P-body interaction explains why these
interactions might have eluded prior systematic studies of αS interactors: such studies
either used only the C-terminal of αS as bait(McFarland et al., 2008) or employed large,
potentially disruptive N-terminal tags(Hein et al., 2015). Notably, a recent cancer proteomics
study also identified decapping-module interactions with αS, supporting our observations
(Kennedy et al., 2020).
The connection between αS and decapping proteins might extend beyond neurons. αS is
highly abundant in hematopoietic cells(Barbour et al., 2008) and within CNS glia (Brück
et al., 2016; Halliday and Stevens, 2011; Scheiblich et al., 2021) . Therefore, effects of αS
on the cellular transcriptome could be highly context dependent. In hematopoietic cells,
inflammatory cytokines are heavily regulated at the post-transcriptional level by P-body
proteins (Ivanov and Anderson, 2013). The connection of αS to P-bodies may be especially
important in the context of viral and inflammatory responses in non-neuronal tissues.
P-bodies have been implicated in controlling viral life-cycles from yeast to human cells
and they are well-established targets of viral proteins(Beckham and Parker, 2008; Gaete-
Argel et al., 2019). Intriguingly, αS has also been directly connected to viral responses in
mouse studies (Beatman et al., 2016; Massey and Beckham, 2016). Future studies should
investigate whether αS’s immune connections are linked in part to P-body regulation.
The impetus for our investigations arose in genetic and proteome analyses in yeast and
flies (Fig. 1). How αS impacts P-body biology in yeast and flies remains speculative for
now. In S.cerevisiae, there is no Edc4 homolog, although there is a homolog (Pdc1) in
S.pombe. While we cannot rule out that as-yet-unknown bridging factors exist across species
between αS and P-bodies, a parsimonious explanation is inherent plasticity in the P-body
network. Although decapping-module proteins are conserved from yeast to humans, the
module is held together by short linear interaction motifs (SLIMs). Such motifs evolve
more rapidly than well-folded domains, enabling a high degree of plasticity(Jonas and
Izaurralde, 2013). Indeed, many decapping protein interactions have been reconfigured
during evolution(Fromm et al., 2011; She et al., 2008). We hypothesize that the αS-
decapping protein interaction surfaces might differ in different species. Our specific genetic
approaches, BridGE for common variants and RVTT for rare variants (Fig. 7), are also
predicated on this idea. We surmised that, for the P-body pathway, individual genes would
be less likely to show signal than a pathway-based approaches. Both methods suggested
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 16
in different ways that cumulative genetic interactions (BridGE) or rare-variant burden
conferred increased risk for PD.
Limitations
Genetic manipulations in this study were performed in model organisms (Fig.1). Direct
genetic manipulations of P-body genes in human neurons, albeit nontrivial, will be important
to perform in the future. They could establish the dependence of mRNA stability directly
on P-body proteins and direct dependence of αS toxicity on P-body genes in more
disease-relevant cells. Redundancy and baseline alterations in mRNA stability will be
experimental challenges to overcome, as will the development of tractable αS toxicity
assays in iPSC neurons. In vitro kinetic competition assays and atomic-resolution structural
information will be required to delineate how exactly αS modulates the decapping module
enzymatic activities. These studies will likely require reconstitution of decapping-module
proteins along with αS in vitro. Importantly, high quality reagents for Xrn1 and Dcp2
(such as nanobodies, knock-ins) are needed to interrogate these important enzymes in
synucleinopathies. In future studies, more subtle measurements of mRNA decay kinetics,
such as metabolic labeling, could be utilized to avoid secondary effects of ActinomycinD
A thorough evaluation of the effect on P-body physiology and mRNA stability in SNCA
knock-out cells is warranted and will strengthen the argument that P-bodies are tied to
endogenous αS function. Our investigations should also be extended to different cell types,
within and outside the CNS. In this study, our neuronal experiments were performed in
tractable iNs and correspondingly postmortem studies forcused on cortex. Although brain
cortex is also affected in PD and other synucleinopathies (Foffani and Obeso, 2018), the
investigation of P-bodies should be extended to midbrain dopaminergic neurons and other
sites of PD pathology.
Our data suggest that αS is more closely associated with soluble micro P-body complexes
where active mRNA degradation is thought to take place(Eulalio et al., 2007; Horvathova
et al., 2017). How αS is excluded from the condensed P-bodies remains unknown.
Furthermore, how common gene ontologies recovered from neuronal decay data and
ROSMAP analysis arise and if there are any detectable RNA motifs in the transcriptome
affected by αS accumulation should be more thoroughly studied.
Experimentally determined biological interactions, in this case among P-body genes and
SNCA (Fig. 1), can increase power in human genetic analyses (Fig. 7). In the BridGE
analysis, common SNP variants linked to SNCA and P-body genes, when analyzed
as SNP1-SNP2 pairs, reveal association with PD risk. This is missed when SNPs are
considered individually. Hubs of the inferred gene-gene interaction network include SNCA
and LSM7 (Fig.7E), the latter linked in prior studies to PD through a genome-wide
significant SNP (rs6212067) (Chang et al., 2017). Notably, the method assumes gene-
gene interactions underlie biological interactions, but it does not definitively establish
epistasis, namely that SNP1 modifies the risk induced by SNP2, which would require more
mechanistic studies. Single-gene rare-variant studies are even more statistically challenging.
While such studies have recently identified suggestive signal in P-body and related genes
(Chartier-Harlin et al., 2011; Siitonen et al., 2017), the studies are thoroughly under-
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 17
powered. RVTT (Fig. 7G-7H) provides a statistically powerful way to quantify association
of rare variants in modest datasets (Fig.7H). It has several notable limitations, however.
First, it assumes that all rare qualifying variants in the pathway have effects in the same
direction. Second, if the pathway under question contains many unimportant genes, RVTT
is underpowered to detect a signal. Third, RVTT ignores the edge relationships of the genes
within the pathway.
In sum, we have identified a direct cytosolic role for αS in P-body regulation, mediated
by the same N-terminus residues responsible for membrane tethering. This dichotomous
function sheds new light on αS biology and the pathophysiology of synucleinopathies, and
genetic drivers of disease vulnerability. Our data open up new ways of considering the role
of αS role in health and disease, in different cellular compartments and in different cell
types. Beyond αS and P-bodies, parallels to the biology of other intrinsically disordered and
conformationally plastic proteins will likely be rich and worthy of further exploration.
STAR METHODS
Resource availability
Lead Contact—Further information and requests for resources and reagents should
be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Vikram Khurana
(vkhurana@bwh.harvard.edu)
Material availability—All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available
from the lead contact with a completed materials transfer agreement.
Data and code availability
• The original mass spectra for the SILAC experiments and the protein
sequence database used for searches have been deposited in the public
proteomics repository MassIVE (http://massive.ucsd.edu) and are accessible
at ftp://massive.ucsd.edu/MSV000089026/. Bulk RNAseq data is submitted to
GEO with the submission number GSE199349 and will be available as of
06.01.2022. BridGE analysis used publicly available GWAS data and obtained
from dbGaP at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=gap through
dbGaP accessions (phs000196.v3.p1, phs000089.v3.p2, phs000048.v1.p1,
phs000126.v2.p1, phs000918.v1.p1, phs000394.v1.p1, phs000127.v2.p1,
phs000344.v1.p1, phs000101.v3.p1) and the Accelerating Medicines Partnership
Parkinson's disease (AMP PD: https://amp-pd.org/). Rare Variant Trend Test
(RVTT) analysis used publicly available data and the data for case-control
Parkinson’s disease cohorts were obtained from the AMP-PD Knowledge
Platform (https://www.amp-pd.org). AMP PD – a public-private partnership –
is managed by the FNIH and funded by Celgene, GSK, the Michael J. Fox
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, Pfizer, and Verily. Specifically, we utilized the case-control
cohort from the Parkinson’s Disease Biomarker Program (PDBP) consortium
which is supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 18
Stroke (NINDS) at the National Institutes of Health. Full list of PDBP
investigators can be found at https://pdbp.ninds.nih.gov/policy. The PDBP
Investigators have not participated in reviewing the data analysis or content
of the manuscript. Additionally, we used the sporadic PD cases and healthy
controls from PPMI sub-cohort of AMP-PD. PPMI (www.ppmi-info.org) is a
public-private partnership, that is funded by the Michael J. Fox Foundation
for Parkinson’s Research and funding partners, List of full names of all the
PPMI funding partners found at www.ppmi-info.org/fundingpartners. The PPMI
Investigators have not participated in reviewing the data analysis or content of
the manuscript.
• The code used for the analysis of the RNAseq data can be found
in https://github.com/bwh-bioinformatics-hub/Hallacli2022Cell. (DOI:10.5281/
zenodo.6477548). ROSMAP analysis did not create original code but
descriptions of clinical and pathological outcomes are available at the
Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Centre Research Resource Sharing Hub (https://
www.radc.rush.edu). The BridGE software for gene-gene interaction analysis
is available at https://github.com/csbio/BridGE/tree/master/BridGE_genes. (DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.6473560).
• Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper
is available from the lead contact upon request
Experimental models and subject details
Yeast models—All yeast strains (S. cerevisiae) were on W303 background (W303, Mat
a/alpha, can1-100, his3-11,15, leu2-3,112, trp1-1, ura3-1, ade2-1::Ade2). Unless otherwise
stated, yeasts were grown at 30°C in standard growth media. Rich media, YPD, was 1%
yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% glucose. Synthetic media was comprised of complete
supplement mixture (CSM) media (and its drop out derivatives) together with 6.7g/L yeast
nitrogen base and 2% glucose. For solid media, 2% agar was included. RBP yTRAP library
was generated previously (Newby et al., 2017) and all yeast strains used and generated in
this study are tabulated in Table S1.
Fly models—Drosophila crosses, aging and assays were performed at 25°C. Assays
were performed on 10-day-old flies. The human QUAS-wild type α-synuclein line has
been described previously (Ordonez et al., 2018). Briefly, human wild-type form of α-
synuclein (SNCA) was cloned into the pQUAST vector and flies created by embryo
injection (BestGene) to generate the QUAS-α-synuclein WT line. The pan-neuronal
nSyb-QF2 and nSyb-GAL4 drivers were used to control expression of transgenic SNCA
and transgenic RNAi, respectively. Control flies were of the genotype nSyb-QF2, nSyb-
GAL4 /+. Locomotor assays were performed as described in (Olsen and Feany, 2019).
XRN1(PCM) RNAi lines are stock1 (HMS01169), stock2 (GLC01410).
Insect cell expression—ExpiSf9™cells were obtained from ThermoFisher as part of
the expression system starter kit (A38841). The cells were cultured at 27°C in disposable
Erlenmeyer flasks (vented caps) with gentle shaking (95 rpm). The cells were kept at >90%
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 19
viability measured by cell counting with Trypan blue. Cells were passaged when they
reached 10 mil/ml confluency back to 1 mil/ml confluency.
Human cell lines—HEK Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 cell line (RRID:CVCL_U427, fetal
kidney origin, female sex) was purchased from Invitrogen (Catalog No: R78007). The
cells were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher: 10566; high glucose, GlutaMAX™
Supplement, minus NaPyruvate), supplemented with heat inactivated 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum, Zeocin (100 μg/ml) and Blasticidin (3-5 μg/ml) with 5% CO and 37°C.
2
For lentivirus generation, HEK293 FT cells were purchased from Invitrogen (R70007)
and maintained in supplemented DMEM media (DMEM, high glucose, GlutaMAX™
Supplement,1X Non-Essential Amino Acids, 1X Sodium Pyruvate, 10% Hi FBS, 0.5 mg/ml
Geneticin). Cells were passaged every 4-5 days when they reached to 90% confluency. The
cells were checked for mycoplasma contamination every month. Pen/Strep was avoided in
DMEM to unmask any bacterial/fungi contamination. Most of the human cell lines were
derived from the HEK Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 (see below).
iPSC—SNCA A53T fibroblasts from a Contursi kindred patient (female gender, age
49) were previously described(Chung et al., 2013). They were collected under BU
protocol (#H-27479) and then cultured/reprogrammed/differentiated under MGH protocol
(#2009P000775) and MIT COUHES protocol (#0807002834). The line was licensed
from Whitehead Institute to Yumanity Therapeutics, and thereafter to BWH. The SNCA
triplication iPSC cell line of an ‘Iowa kindred’ patient with early-onset and severe
parkinsonism and dementia was obtained from the NINDS Human Cell and Data Repository
(Patient code: NDS00201; iPSC line code: ND34391, female gender, age 55). In general,
iPS cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO and checked for mycoplasma every second
2
week. iPS cells were cultured on 6-well plate coated with Matrigel (Corning, Cat. No.
354277) in mTeSR1 medium (StemCell Technologies, Cat. No. 85850) and passaged using
Gentle Cell Dissociation Reagent (GCDR, StemCell Technologies, Cat. No. 07174) or
PBS-EDTA(1 mM) when they reached a density of 70–90%. For single cell dispersion of
iPS cells for neuronal differentiation, Accutase (Gibco, 00-4555-56) was used (see below for
neuronal differentiation). For SNCA triplication lines, G-banded karyotyping was performed
every 10-12 passages (Cell Line Genetics). TaqMan Copy Number Assay were performed
to confirm SNCA triplication in the ND34391 iPSC line. Genomic DNAs were extracted
using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Cat. No. 51304). Human SNCA copy number
primer (Hs02236645_cn), TaqMan Copy Number Reference Assay (Human, RNAse P,
ThermoFisher, Cat. No. 4403326) and TaqMan Genotyping Master Mix (ThermoFisher, Cat.
No. 4371355) were used in the assay. A control iPSC line (14-20 035iPS courtesy of Matt
Huentelman, TGEN), a second SNCA triplication line and a mutant SNCA (A53>T) line
were used as controls (The results can be found in Supp.Fig.5A). The piggybac mediated
Ngn2 transgenesis, CRISPR mediated isogenic corrections of these lines are described in
detail below.
iPSC derived neurons—Patient derived human cortical neurons were derived from
a modified Ngn2 transcription factor induction protocol and cultured at 37°C with
5% CO and checked for mycoplasma every second week (described below in detail).
2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 20
Neuronal identity was verified by immunofluorescence of Map2 and Tuj1, pan-neuronal
markers. Ngn2 induced cortical neurons lacked glial markers (S100B and Vimentin) and a
proliferation marker Ki67 (Supp.Fig.5E). Neurons were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO and
2
checked for mycoplasma every second week.
ROSMAP Study subjects—Postmortem data analyzed in this study were gathered as
part of the Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project (ROS/MAP) (Bennett
et al., 2012a, 2012b; Jager et al., 2018), two longitudinal cohort studies of the elderly, one
from across the United States and the other from the greater Chicago area. All subjects were
recruited free of dementia (mean age at entry=78±8.7 (SD) years) and signed an Anatomical
Gift Act allowing for brain autopsy at time of death. Written informed consent was obtained
from all ROS/MAP participants and study protocols were approved by the Rush University
Institutional Review Board.
Post-mortem brain tissue for PLA analysis—Postmortem brains from familial PD
patients (SNCA A53T, SNCA duplication, and control brains) were obtained from Mayo
Clinic Florida Brain Bank under IRB 15-009452. The details of these brains are tabulated
in TableS7. We thank Dr. Dennis Dickson for generously providing this tissue as part of
a collaboration to our colleagues Drs Dennis Selkoe and Tim Bartels, for whom we are
grateful for mediation in obtaining these rare reagents.
Method details
Molecular cloning—Gene cloning was done either by traditional cloning (restriction
enzyme-ligation), gateway cloning or Gibson cloning method. All geneblocks (double
stranded DNA fragments) and primers were purchased from IDT (Integrated DNA
Technologies). For traditional cloning ligations, 2X Quick Ligase is used according to
manufacturer’s protocol (NEB, M2200). For gateway cloning, LR and BP clonase mix were
purchased from Invitrogen and used half the amount of supplier recommended protocol.
For Gibson cloning, in-house 1.33X Assembly Master Mix was made as follows: 1.875
mL Assembly Master Mix was generated by mixing 500 μL 5x Gibson Buffer (6 ml of
Gibson buffer includes: 3 mL 1M Tris.HCl pH 7.5, 300 μL 1M MgCl , 60 μL each of 100
2
mM dNTPs, 300 μL of 1M DTT, 300 μL of 100 mM NAD+, 1.5 g of PEG-8000, added
up to 6mL by ddI H O), 1 μL T5 Exonuclease, 31.2 μL Phusion Polymerase, 250 μL Taq
2
DNA Ligase, 1093 μL ddI H O. The Assembly Master Mix was aliquoted and stocked at
2
−20°C. Each Gibson reaction was performed mixing 3 μL of the Master mix and 1 μL of
backbone/insert constructs and incubated at 50°C for 1 hour. For the propagation of Gateway
donor or destination vectors, plasmids were propagated in ccdB resistant strains of E.coli.
For the propagation of regular constructs, NEB DH5α strain was used. For highly repetitive
DNA containing plasmids, NEB Stable® cells were used. For large (>10 kB) and repetitive
DNA containing plasmids- such as PiggyBac constructs- NEB® 10-beta cells were used. All
plasmids used and generated in the study are tabulated in Table S2.
Yeast transformation—Overnight yeast cultures were grown to saturation and diluted
back to OD =0.1 in 50 ml rich media for incubation at 30°C until OD =0.5-0.9. The
600 600
cells were collected by centrifugation (1,500g, 5 min, RT) and washed with 25 ml dH O at
2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 21
room temperature (RT). After spin, the pellet was re-suspended in 5 ml SORB buffer (100
mM LiOAc, 10 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1M Sorbitol). After another round of
spin, the cells were re-suspended in 360 μL SORB buffer + 40 μL salmon sperm DNA (2
mg/ml stock). These competent cells can be kept indefinitely at −80°C. For integrations, 50
μl thawed cells were mixed with 10 μl of linearized (or digested) DNA and six volumes
of PEG buffer (100mM LiOAc, 10mM Tris.Cl pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 40% PEG 3350) was
added on to the cells and briefly vortexed for incubation at RT for 30 minutes. 1/9 volume
of DMSO was added and the cells were heat shocked at 42°C for 15 min without shaking.
The cells were centrifuged for 2000 rpm for 3 minutes and the supernatant was aspirated.
For auxotrophic markers, the cells were plated directly on selective media plates, while for
antibiotic markers (Nourseothricin, G418, Hygromycin) cells were recovered in 4ml YPD at
30°C for at least 4 hours.
Generation of Estradiol inducible Neurodegenerative protein expressing
(pZ_ND) yeast strains—ZEM module (Zif268 - Estradiol Receptor ligand binding
domain - Msn2 activation domain) is constitutively expressed under EIFa promoter. pZ
denotes for the recognition element of ZEM module upstream of the ND open reading
frame. Coding sequence for ND proteins were taken from human orfeome collection
(for SOD(A4V) point mutant was introduced by point mutagenesis kit) and cloned
into LEU integration pZ plasmids. For SNCA, two copy was integrated, one in LEU
loci and the other in HIS locus. One copy untagged SNCA (wt) was marginally toxic
(unpublished observation) whereas GFP tagged one copy SNCA was quite toxic. All toxicity
measurements were determined by growth curve analysis at OD (explained below).
600
Design of RNA-binding protein yTRAP sensors—The yTRAP RBP platform is
a compendium of 168 well-characterized haploid yeast strains (TableS1). Each strain
expresses a specific RBP tagged with a sensor module (yTRAP sensor) and an output
module. RBP tagged with yTRAP sensor is expressed on top of the endogenous RBP.
yTRAP sensor module is composed of a nuclear localization sequence(NLS), a synthetic
Zinc Finger (ZnF) domain and VP64 activation domain(AD). Furthermore, each strain
contains the cognate DNA element specific to the synthetic ZnF which drives the expression
of bright mNeonGreen reporter. This cognate ZnF promoter along with the mNeonGreen
reporter is the ‘output module’. The output module assesses any tagged RBP for its
availability to bind the ZnF cognate promoter. This “availability” requires both the tagged
protein’s presence in sufficient quantity and its ability to migrate to the nucleus. Since this
availability state can be altered through a variety of perturbations (including aggregation,
degradation, sequestration, or release from a complex), the yTRAP sensor generates an
indiscriminatory integrated perturbation output (Newby et al., 2017).
Generation of RNA-binding protein yTRAP sensors—For each sensor strain, 2 μg
of the sensor plasmid (gateway cloned to yTRAP destination vector) was digested with Notl
and the digest (without purification) was transformed to W303, Mat a, can1-100, his3-11,15,
leu2-3,112, trp1-1, ura3-1, ade2-1::Ade2 (This strain is corrected for Ade2 gene to remove
the build-up of red color). Each transformant was re-streaked twice for pure yeast clones.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 22
Growth curve analysis for yeast—Yeast cultures were grown to saturation either
overnight or 24 hours in 96 deep well plates. 96 deep well plate selected cultures were
grown for two days for saturation in selected media. The cells are diluted 400 times
to a rough OD of 0.03. 70 μl of 0.03 OD of cells are transferred to 384 well plates
(Nunc-265202) and OD is measured with Biotek Epoch2 microplate reader for at least 45
hours with recordings every 15 minutes at OD 600 nm and 30°C.
Flow cytometry for the yeast—Saturated cultures were diluted hundred-fold to 200 μl
fresh synthetic media in a 96 well plate. At the time of measurement, typically 6 hours
after the dilution, 10 μg/mL propidium iodide (Sigma Aldrich Cat. No. P4864) was added to
media to detect dead cells. All the measurements were acquired by MacsQuant VYB flow
cytometer (Miltenyi Biotech) with a 96-well plate platform. A typical run contained 10.000
events with medium flow rate (~700-800 events per second) in the screen mode. The B1
channel (525/50 filter) was used to measure green fluorescence. The Y3 channel (661/20
filter) was used to measure red fluorescence or propidium iodide stain.
Yeast genetics and rescue experiments—Yeast strains for the overexpression
experiments were generated by transforming the transgene plasmid (a low-copy, galactose
inducible plasmid containing the gene of interest with a URA3 selectable marker). These
strains were pinned from solid media into liquid media in 96 well plates and grown to
saturation. They were then diluted into media containing raffinose as the carbon source and
grown to saturation once again to relieve the repression of the GAL1 promoter. Finally, these
cultures were diluted to an OD of 0.2 in fresh media, grown for 6 hours and pinned in serial
dilution onto plates containing estradiol and galactose (SG-URA+Estradiol). The plates were
incubated for 48 hours and imaged using a scanner. Estradiol concentration was 5 nM for
deletion experiment and 3 nM for overexpression experiments. For gene deletions, a KAN
cassette was inserted in the open reading frame of the genes and confirmed by PCR.
Yeast image acquisitions—All strains were constructed in the using the W303 genetic
background yeast strain. The EIFα-promoter driven ZEM was integrated at the YBR032W
locus and pZ-driven SNCA or empty control vector was integrated at the HIS3 locus. The
cells bearing an empty vector were differentiated from SNCA-expressing cells with the
addition of a constitutively expressed blue fluorescent protein driven by the TDH3 promoter
integrated at the LEU2 locus. For the co-culture experiments, cells harboring a single copy
of SNCA were mixed at a 2:1 ratio with cells harboring a single copy of the empty plasmid.
They were then grown for 6 hours from a starting density of OD600 = 0.08 in synthetically
defined complete media containing 1 μM estradiol. All images were acquired with a Nikon
Plan Apo 100x oil objective (NA 1.4) using a Nikon Eclipse Ti-E inverted microscope and a
CCD camera (Andor technology).
yTRAP perturbation screen details (pZ_ND x RBP-yTRAP)—Neurodegeneration
(ND) causative protein expressing yeast strains were mated to yTRAP RBP library in rich
media and double selected to include both mating types. The selection was carried out
twice and single clones were struck. Before the day of flow cytometry, the cells had been
inoculated at least 36 hours prior to reach to saturation. This oversaturation was to normalize
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 23
variations that might have come from unequal initial dilution for flow cytometry. On the
day flow measurements, the cells were diluted 100x fold in synthetic media (SD-CSM) and
induced by estradiol (100 nM final concentration). An important detail to consider was to
stagger control (uninduced strain) right below induced strain to eliminate time delays during
the flow acquisition. After 6 hours of estradiol induction (incubation at 30°C), plates were
measured by flow cytometry as detailed above. The measurements were gated against dead
cells, large size excluded (FC vs SSC) and median values for GFP signal was chosen as the
sample mean indicator. Each screen was carried out three times. Estradiol induced cells were
slightly brighter than un-induced cells. To eliminate this intra-plate variation (intra-scaling),
10 darkest sensors were chosen, averaged and the brightness was normalized accordingly.
The screen was performed three times. Individual replicate values were calculated from
median mNeonGreen signal of 10000 yeast cells measured by flow cytometry.
Quantitative PCR for Drosophila RNAi lines—RNA was isolated from four
Drosophila heads using Trizol following previously published protocol (Sarkar et al.,
2019). Briefly, 4 drosophila heads were homogenized together in 1 mL of Trizol and
incubated for 10 mins. Post incubation 0.2 mL of chloroform was added, incubated
for 3 mins and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 mins. 0.5 mL of the aqueous layer
was transferred to a fresh tube and incubated with 0.7 mL of isopropanol for 10 mins
to precipitate the RNA. Post incubation the tubes were centrifuged at 12,000 g for
10 mins, the supernatant was discarded, the pellet was washed two times with 70 %
ethanol, and air dried. RNA was dissolved in water and measured using a NanoDrop.
Post-RNA isolation, 500 ng of RNA was converted to cDNA using high-capacity
cDNA synthesis kit from Applied Biosystems (# 4368814). Quantitative SYBR green
PCR assay was performed using SYBR green master mix from Applied Biosystems
(#4309155). The following validated primers were synthesized at the Biopolymer
Facility at Harvard Medical School; Xrn1_F- GCGAGGAGGTCAAGTTCGG, Xrn1_R-
GCTCGTCTGTTCTCAGGGC, Rpl32_F- GACCATCCGCCCAGCATAC, and Rpl32_R-
CGGCGACGCACTCTGTT. The fold change in gene expression was determined by the
ΔΔC method, where C is the threshold value. Rpl32 was used as a housekeeping gene.
t t
Baculovirus mediated insect cell protein expression—ExpiSF™ expression system
(ThermoFisher: A38841) guidelines from the manufacturer’s was followed. In short, a
pFASTBacDual expression plasmid was used to express either HA-Edc4 alone(N-terminally
tagged) or αS-V5/HA-Edc4. These plasmids were transposed to DH10Bac™ competent
cells. Proper integration of pFASTBac plasmids were screened both by blue-white screening
and PCR analysis. The bacmid was purified with a modified miniprep protocol, making
sure that the large bacmid is not sheared during the isolation. The bacmids were kept at
4°C no more than a week before the infection to avoid degradation. ExpiSf9™cells were
cultured at 27°C in disposable Erlenmeyer flasks with vented caps with gentle shaking. The
cells were kept at >90% viability measured by cell counting with Trypan blue. The bacmids
were transfected to ExpiSf9™cells and the cells were observed for decline of growth and
volume expansion. When the cell viability decreased to 60% and the cell diameter enlarged
20% (roughly to 20 um), the media was collected(P0). P0 viruses were directly used for
infection (500 ul for 50 ml culture) and expression. After 3 days of infection, the cell pellet
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 24
was harvested and kept at −80°C. Protein extraction and pulldown were carried exactly as
in HEK293 cells (see below) except that cell lysis of Sf9 cells were carried out by repeated
freeze-thawing.
Transient transfection of HEK293 derived lines—For the transient transfection of
HEK293 cell lines, a total of 5 μg of plasmid(s) (for 10 cm diameter dish) or 2 μg of total
plasmids (for 6 well plates) was transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher, Cat.
No: 11668) in a 1-3 ratio (3 μL of Lipofectamine2000 per 1 μg of plasmid) according to
manufacturer’s protocol. The confluency of the cells ranged between 60-90% on the day of
transfection. The post-transfection incubation period with Opti-MEM reduced serum media
was 5-6 hours, after which the cell media was changed to regular media. Cell harvesting was
carried out 36-48 hours after transfection.
Generation of human HEK293 stable cell lines—For generation isogenic FLP
recombinase mediated stable cell lines, 0.3 million HEK Flp-ln™ T-REx™ 293 cells were
seeded to each well of 6 well plate two days prior to transfection. On the day of transfection,
the cells should be 80-90% confluent. For transfection, 200 ng of FRT containing plasmid
(for the negative control, 200 ng plasmid without an FRT site was used) and 2000 ng
of pOG44 recombinase plasmid was co-transfected as follows: Plasmids were mixed in
OptiMEM media (without selection) to a total volume of 150 μl and mixed well (Part A).
6 μl of Lipofectamine2000 reagent was mixed with 150 μl of OptiMEM, mixed well and
incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes (Part B). Part A and B are mixed and incubated
for 25 minutes at room temperature. The cells were washed with DPBS and supplemented
with 1 ml of OptiMEM (no antibiotics). The PartA-B mix was dropwise applied on to the
cells, mixed gently and incubated for 6 hours in the incubator. After 6 hours, the media
was changed to DMEM. 24 hours later, the cells were trypsinized and each well was
transferred to a 10 cm dish without any selection. Following day, the media was replaced
with the selective media (DMEM, high glucose, GlutaMAX™ Supplement,10% HI FBS,
Blasticidin (5 μg/ml), Hygromycin (100-200 μg/ml)). We have observed that Hygromycin
selection could start in a lower concentration 100 μg/ml and increased over time to 200
μg/ml. The media was replaced every 3-4 days and colonies should be visible within 2-3
weeks. After the control transfection was completely dead and visible colonies were seen
in the experimental transfections, the plate was trypsinized and reseeded to a 10 cm dish.
When the cells reached confluency, a stock was generated immediately and continued to
be passaged with DMEM, Blasticidin (3 μg/ml), Hygromycin (100 μg/ml). The cells were
checked for transgenic expression with dox (0.1 μg/ml). Further quality check could be
done by Zeocin sensitivity. For the generation of PiggyBac mediated insertions, essentially
same protocol was followed except the FLP recombinase was exchanged with PiggyBac
Transposase plasmid. All stable cell lines were kept as pooled, no single cell isolation was
carried out to avoid cell to cell variability. Stable cell lines generated for this study are
tabulated in Table S3.
Stable Pooled CRISPR/Cas9 Knockouts in HEK293 cells—pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro
(PX459) V2.0 (Addgene ID: 62988) was a kind gift from Dr. Lei Liu. This plasmid
contains Cas9 from S. pyogenes with 2A self-cleaving peptide to Puromycin selection
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 25
along with U6 promoter sgRNA. In order to track BbsI digestion more clearly, mRuby
sequence was inserted in place of mock gRNA sequence. After complete digestion, 698 bp
mRuby sequence should be observed for confident assessment of digestion. Guide RNA
oligo designs targeted to P-body components were initially chosen from IDT and Synthego
algorithms. Our observations after three knock out (KO) experiments (3 guides from IDT,
3 from Synthego) confirmed that Synthego designs yielded better KOs, therefore we chose
Synthego designs. Cloning of guide RNAs into the Cas9 vector was followed exactly as
the Zhang lab protocols (CRISPR Genome Engineering Toolbox). Briefly, 1 μg backbone
was digested using FastDigest BbsI (Fermentas) together with FastAP (Fermentas) and
gel purified by Qiagen columns. The oligos (100 μM) were annealed and phosphorylated
in a single reaction, using T4 PNK (NEB) in T4 ligation buffer (NEB). The conditions
were 37°C 30 min and 95°C ramping down to 25°C with 5°C/min rate. The oligos were
diluted 200x fold and ligated to the 50 ng digested backbone with Quick Ligase (NEB).
The plasmids were digest and sequence verified. Stable lines were generated as mentioned
above with initial 1 μg/ml Puromycin selection and maintaining the cultures in 0.5 μg/ml
Puromycin concentration. The cell lines were kept pooled due to biochemical nature of
experiments rather than phenotypic assays. Three different guides were used but best two
were chosen for the KO experiments for independent verification. The KO was verified by
western blotting and immunofluorescence against the targeted protein. For mock knockout
control stable lines, original vector was used directly. All guide RNAs used are tabulated in
Table S4
Immunofluorescence (IF) in HEK cell lines—Freshly passaged 10000 HEK293 cells
were seeded on poly-D-Lysine (Thermo, A3890401) coated 96 well glass bottom microplate
(MGB096-1-2-LG-L, 0.17mm, low Glass). Coating was carried out at least three hours
and extensively washed with water and 1x PBS before the cells were seeded. After the
experiment, cells were fixed with 4% PFA in 1x PBS (16% Paraformaldehyde; EM Grade
(EM Sciences; Cat#: 15710; Lot:180910-04) was freshly open and diluted into 10X PBS
Buffer; pH7.4 (Invitrogen; Cat#: AM9625; Lot: 00602726) and brought up with ultrapure
water (Thermo,10977015) to final 4% PFA and 1x PBS concentration). Fixation was carried
out for 15 minutes at room temperature (@RT) after which the wells were carefully washed
with 1x PBS three times and final wash was carried out with 1x PBS with 0.02% Sodium
Azide mix for storage. The plate was sealed with aluminum tape (Corning® 96-well
Microplate Aluminum Sealing Tape, 6570) for storage at 4°C. The cells were permeabilized
(PBS 0.5% Triton X-100) 15 minutes and blocked (5% BSA, 0.05% Triton-X100) for 1
hour @RT. Primary antibody incubation (150 μl blocking solution with primary antibody)
was carried out in dark 4°C overnight, no shaking. (Please refer to TableS5 for the antibody
concentrations). The cells were washed 3 times with 1x PBS for 10 minutes @RT and
incubated for 1 hour @RT in dark with secondary Alexa conjugated (488 nm or 594 nm)
antibodies (1:1000x diluted in blocking solution). The cells were washed two times with 1x
PBS (10 min each) and incubated for 10 minutes with PBS-Hoechst solution (2000x fold
dilution to PBS from commercial stock, Hoechst 33342), after which the cells were washed
twice with PBS and images were acquired immediately.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 26
Images were acquired with Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope, with 40X Plan Apo dry
objective (MRD0045) and Andor Zyla 4.2P sCMOS camera (No binning, 200 MHz readout
rate, 12 bit & Gain4 dynamic range). For HEK293 cells, usually 5 Z-stacks were acquired
within a 2 μm range. For image processing, FIJI software was used. Separate channel stacks
were Z-projected (maximum intensity) and ROIs (Region of interest) were selected from
each field manually.
Whole cell protein extraction from mammalian cell lines—The cells were
harvested by Trypsin-EDTA and washed twice with PBS at room temperature. After
transferring to 1.5 ml protein low binding mini tubes (Eppendorf; 22431081), the cell
pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Removing from cold storage, the cell pellets
were immediately topped with RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific; 89900) supplemented
with Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich; 11873580001) and
PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich; 4906845001). The cell pellets
were kept on ice for 30 minutes and vortexed every 10 minutes to enable complete
suspension of pellets to the RIPA buffer. After incubation, the cells were centrifuged at
21000g at tabletop centrifuge for 25 minutes and immediately 10 μL was separated for
BCA protein quantification. The rest of the supernatant was mixed with equal volume
of 4X NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo Fisher; NP0007) supplemented with 40
mM TCEP Bond Breaker (Thermo Fisher; 77720) and boiled for 10 minutes at 65°C. For
long term storage, the cell lysates were kept at −80°C. For the quantification of protein
concentration, 10 μL of lysate sample (right after extraction) was diluted 4-5 times and
measured with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit according to manufacturer’s guidelines
(Thermo Fisher; 23225). For western blotting, 5-20 μg of total protein was loaded on the gel.
Pulldowns in HEK293 cell lines—The cells (iPSC derived neurons or HEK293 cell
lines) were harvested by Trypsin-EDTA and washed twice with PBS at room temperature.
After transferring to 1.5 ml protein low binding centrifuge tubes, the cell pellets were flash
frozen in liquid nitrogen. The pellets were resuspended in 500-1000 μl lysis buffer (50 mM
HEPES/KOH pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol,
Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail). The cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer and passed through 27-gauge
needle 8 times. The lysate was incubated further on ice for 15 minutes and centrifuged at
21000g at a table-top centrifuge for 25 minutes. The supernatant was considered as whole
cell lysate. The protein concentration was measured with BCA assay and 50 μg of protein
lysate in 50 μL of lysis buffer was mixed with 50 μL 4X NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer
supplemented with 40 mM TCEP Bond Breaker to generate 0.5 μg/μl of INPUT sample.
For the pull-down of Avi-tagged proteins, MyOneT1 Streptavidin magnetic Dynabeads
(Invitrogen; 65601) were used. For every 500 μg of protein extract, 10 μl of MyOneT1
beads was used (This ratio was optimized to minimize background). Before the pulldown,
the beads had been equilibrated with once with PBS and twice with lysis buffer. The
pulldown was carried out at cold room in a rotator for 30 minutes. The beads were washed
three times with wash buffer (50 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.4, 250 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton
X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail and
PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). After the third wash, the beads were resuspended
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 27
in 50 μl 2X NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (supplemented with 20 mM TCEP) by briefly
mixing in a thermoshaker. To break the Biotin-Streptavidin interaction, the beads were
incubated for 15 minutes at 95°C. The eluate was briefly centrifuged and transferred to a
fresh tube. For western blotting, 5-10 μg of INPUT and 20% of final pulldown eluate is
loaded on the gel. For silver staining of the gels, SilverQuest™ Silver Staining Kit was
used according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen; LC6070). For HA pulldowns of
Edc4 variants, essentially same protocol was followed except that HA pulldown time was 2
hours with Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads(Life Technologies,88836). For endogenous IP
experiments, optimal bead and antibody amounts in the linear range had been determined
first. The antibodies were conjugated to magnetic ProtA/G beads(ThermoFisher) and IP was
performed for 3 hours as explained above.
For quantitative IP experiments in Fig.2H, HEK293 SNCA-Avi+BirA ligase stable cell line
was used. Several P-body genes were gateway cloned (Fig.2H) into a destination vector
that generates an N terminally tagged nanoluciferase protein of interest. The cells were
transiently transfected in a 24 well format and streptavidin pulldown was performed as
described above. 1% of the input was taken and measured with luminescence plate reader
and this value was used for normalization of the pulldown value. In the final wash step
of pulldown, the beads were transferred to a 96 well (each transfection was divided into
4 well in 96 well) white walled flat glass bottom plate and read for luminescence. The IP
measurement was recorded. The pulldown value was normalized to input value.
Western blotting—For SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris protein
gels were used (Thermo Fisher; NP0321BOX) with MOPS running buffer (Thermo Fisher;
NP0001). The gels were transferred to PVDF membranes (Invitrogen; IB24002) with
iBlot™ 2 Gel Transfer Device with the preset P0 setting. After the transfer, the membranes
were fixed with 0.4% Paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature with
slight rocking (This step is especially critical for detection of α-Synuclein protein). The
membranes were washed three times with PBS-T (PBS with 0.1% Tween-20) and blocked
with blocking buffer (5% BSA in PBS-T) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Primary
antibodies are diluted in blocking buffer and incubated overnight at cold room. After
three times PBS-T washing, the secondary HRP conjugated antibodies are incubated with
modified blocking buffer (1% BSA in PBS-T) for 45 minutes at room temperature with
slight rocking. For the detection of Avi-tagged proteins, HRP coupled Streptavidin was
used overnight in blocking buffer (1:10000 dilution). SuperSignal™ West Femto Maximum
Sensitivity HRP Substrate (Thermo Fisher; 1859022) or Clarity Western ECL Substrate
(Biorad; 1705060) was used for signal generation. All the exposures were recorded digitally
by iBright™ CL1000 Imaging System. Generally multiple exposures were recorded by
signal accumulation mode. All antibodies used are tabulated in TableS5.
Blue Native PAGE analysis and P-body solubilization—Blue Native PAGE analysis
was essentially optimized from Invitrogen™ Native PAGE system. NativePAGE™ Sample
Prep Kit (BN2008) was purchased and Native cell lysis buffer (1x NativePAGE™ Sample
Buffer, 2 mM MgCl , 1% CHAPS, 1x Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail
2
and 1 x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail) was prepared by using the 4x Sample
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 28
buffer included in the kit. 1 million cells (HEK293 cells) was resuspended in 70 μl of
Native cell lysis buffer and 5U of Benzonase was added to the samples. The cells were
incubated for 25 C for 25 minutes in a thermoshaker block with 800 rpm shaking. For
the detergent optimization experiments, the Native cell lysis buffer included either 1%
DDM, 1% Digitonin, 0.1% Triton X-100 or 0.5 % NP-40 as final concentrations. After
nuclease incubation, the lysates were centrifuged at 21130 rcf for 15 minutes at 4C. The
supernatants were transferred to a fresh tube and 5 μl is used for BCA protein assay. 20-30
μg of extracts was loaded to NativePAGE™ 3-12% Bis-Tris protein gel along with 20 μl of
NativeMark™ Unstained Protein Standard. For the first hour of run (150V, 60 minutes), the
inner chamber included Dark Cathode buffer and for the remaining 80 minutes (150V), the
inner chamber buffer was exchanged with light cathode buffer. During the whole running,
the outer chamber buffer remained the same. The gel was transferred onto Immobilon® 0.2
um PVDF membrane (ISEQ00010) with 1X NuPAGE® Transfer Buffer. The transfer was in
cold room, with 400 mA stable current for 120 minutes. After the transfer, the membrane
was washed several times with ethanol to remove the coomasie dye until no further washing
was possible. The membrane was let dry overnight on bench. The membrane was reactivated
with methanol and washed several times with PBS-T (PBS with 0.05% Tween-20) and
continued as regular western blot.
Reasoning of Native Page utilization in the context of P-body components: Our data
indicated that the Edc4-αS interaction occurs in soluble sub-complexes, rather than in
condensed P-body granules (Fig.2J). We called them micro P-bodies. We reasoned that
these sub-complexes could be resolved by native-PAGE electrophoresis when freed from
multivalent RNA interactions that might otherwise drive them to P-bodies. Detergent type,
nucleases and lysis temperature (Supp.Fig.6B-F) were all important factors for resolving
Edc4 complexes and, in particular, we found CHAPS detergent and lysis temperature critical
for recovering Edc4 complexes with native-PAGE (Supp.Fig.6B,C). A large proportion of
Edc4 was resolved as an approximately 1 megadalton (MDa) size complex with higher
bands indicating the presence of larger complexes (Supp.Fig.6D). When we knocked out
Edc3 by CRISPR/Cas9, these higher bands diminished (Supp.Fig.6E). In contrast to Edc4,
most Edc3 was resolved as half megadalton complexes with some >1MDa complexes
observable. These larger complexes were dependent on the presence of Edc4 (Supp.Fig.6F).
RNA tethering assays—RNA tethers are stable RNA hairpin structures exhibiting a
high affinity for a cognate protein. We used an RNA tether (5x BoxB elements) with
high affinity for LambdaN peptide (λN). Traditionally RNA tethering assays were done
with three different plasmids; a reporter with the RNA elements, a second reporter for
transfection normalization and the third plasmid containing protein of interest to be tethered.
Transient transfection of three different plasmid could be a source of noise, therefore, we
sought to reduce the complexity of the system in two ways. 1) We combined reporter
and normalizer reporter in the same vector via bi-directional promoter. The design is
represented in Supp.Fig.6H. 2) Instead of transient transfection, we made a stable line for
the reporter construct. Thus the only variable is the transfected transgene to be tethered.
Other modifications included: 1) To both reporters, a degron sequence was included to keep
linearity between RNA and protein levels of the reporter. For the normalizer reporter, the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 29
firefly luciferase (Luc2), CP degron was used. For the nanoluc reporter, PEST sequence was
used. 2) All modules were cloned into a piggyBac (pB) plasmid and the stable cell line
was generated with pB transposition with the aid of the pB transposase. Once the cell lines
were generated, a gateway destination vector was generated to express C terminally tagged
LambdaN tag. To this gateway destination, P-body genes and SNCA gene were LR cloned.
The resultant expression vectors were transiently transfected in a 96 well format. Two days
before the transfections, 10K reporter cell line was seeded to polyD-lysine coated glass
bottom opaque walled sterile plates. The transfections were carried out by Lipofection by
Lipo2000 (ThermoFisher) and the measurements were done with NanoGlo Dial Luciferase
Reporter Assay System (Promega, N1610). The measurements were recorded in FluoStar
Omega (NMG Labtech) reader.
SILAC-MS for αS interactors in HEK293 cells
SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling) of HEK293 cells: HEK cells stably expressing matched
levels of GFP or αS-GFP were grown in SILAC media containing “light” or “heavy”
isotopes for at least 5 cell doubling time to allow complete isotope incorporation into the
proteome.
Antibody crosslinking: ~110 μ l Biorad AffiPrep Protein A beads were equilibrated into
PBST, washed 3 times and resuspended in 500 μl PBST. 55 μg of affinity-purified rabbit anti
GFP antibody (generous gift from Dr. Iain Cheeseman, Whitehead Institute) was mixed into
the beads PBST slurry and rotated for 1 hour at room temperature. The antibody attached
beads were washed 3 times with PBST and 3 times with 0.2 M sodium borate, pH 9. After
the final wash, 900 μl of the 0.2M sodium borate, pH 9 was added to bring the final volume
to ~ 1ml. Freshly prepared 100 μl of 220 mM dimethylpimelimidate (Sigma, D8388) was
added to the tube and rotated gently at room temperature for 30 min. Beads were washed 2
times with 0.2M ethanolamine 0.2M NaCl pH 8.5 and left rotating in the same buffer for 1
hour at room temperature to inactivate the residual crosslinker.
Co-immunoprecipitation: HEK293 cells expressing either GFP or αS-GFP were lysed
with nondenaturing lysis buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 137 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100
and 2 mM EDTA). The lysate was rotated for 30 min at 4°C and centrifuged at 10,000g for
20 min at 4°C. Supernatant was collected and protein concentrations determined using BCA
assay. ~400 mg of lysate was incubated with 50 μl anti-GFP antibody crosslinked beads for
4 hours at 4°C. Beads from GFP or αS-GFP samples were washed once with nondenaturing
lysis buffer, mixed together, washed one more time with the same buffer and denatured by
boiling for 5 min in 2X LDS buffer.
Mass spectrometry and analysis: Following elution from anti-GFP antibody beads,
proteins were separated on a NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris 4-12% gel run for 1 hour at
130V. The gel was stained overnight with Coomassie G-250 (Invitrogen) and subsequently
destained with water. Lanes for each replicate were manually cut into six gel bands.
Processing of gel bands was completed essentially as described in (Hung et al., 2016).
Gel bands were destained in 1:1 acetonitrile: 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0
for several hours followed by dehydration with acetonitrile. Dehydrated gel bands were
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 30
swelled with 100 μL of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for one hour
while shaking followed by 100 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium
bicarbonate for 45 minutes in the dark. The iodoacetamide solution was removed and
bands were dehydrated with acetonitrile. Approximately 10-50 μL of 20 ng/μL Sequencing
Grade Trypsin (Promega, V511X) was added to each sample and digestion was completed
overnight with shaking at room temperature. After the overnight digestion, excess trypsin
solution was removed from each sample and bands were incubated with 20 μL of extraction
solution (60% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA). The extraction solution was collected after 10
minutes, and this process was repeated two additional times. The final peptide extraction
was completed by incubating gel bands with 100% acetonitrile for 1-2 minutes. Extracted
peptides were dried to completeness in a vacuum concentrator, then reconstituted in 100
μL of 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto C18 StageTips(Empore; 66883-U). The tips
were washed twice with 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and peptides were eluted with 50%
acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, before drying in a vacuum concentrator.
Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid/3% acetonitrile and analyzed on
a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Easy-nLC
1000 UPLC-ultra performance liquid chromatography (Proxeon). Online chromatographic
separation was completed using a capillary column (360 μm o.d. × 75 μm i.d.) with a 10
μm integrated emitter tip and self-packed with 23 cm of 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin
(Dr. Maisch GmbH). The UPLC mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid/3% acetonitrile and
the mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. A linear gradient flowing at
200 nL/min and starting at 6% B and increasing to 30% B over 82 minutes was used to
separate peptides with a total run time of 120 minutes. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer
was operated in the data-dependent mode such that after each MS1 scan, consecutive high
energy collision dissociation MS2 scans were recorded on the 12 most abundant precursors.
The resolution used to acquire MS1 and MS2 scans was 70,000 and 17,500, respectively.
The MS1 advance gain control (AGC) target was set to 3×106 ions and the maximum ion
time was set to 10 msec. MS2 scans were recorded with an AGC target of 5×104 ions with
a maximum ion time of 120 msec, isolation width of 2.5 m/z, normalized collision energy of
25, dynamic exclusion time of 20 sec, underfill ratio of 5.0%, and peptide match and isotope
exclusion enabled. Proteins and peptides were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant
software package (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Data were searched against
the UniProt human database. A fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine
and variable modifications of N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine.
The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing cleavages N-terminal to proline and
a maximum of two missed cleavages was utilized for searching. The maximum precursor ion
charge state was set to 6. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search.
The peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 0.01 and the minimum peptide
length was set to 6. Protein information was obtained from the MaxQuant Protein Groups
table. Proteins identified as reverse hits or contaminants were removed from the dataset.
The results of the mass spectrometry analysis can be seen in Table S2. For assessment of
significance, we z-scored the log ratios for all proteins (TableS2, Column I), followed by a
one-sided z-test for proteins with log2 FC > 1. The resulting p-values for these proteins were
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 31
adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) FDR approach (TableS2,
Column K, used for Fig.2C).
SNCA copy-number reduction from triplication SNCA iPSCs
CRISPR design: Isogenic SNCA knock out series were obtained using the CRISPRs/Cas9
system. Guide RNAs targeting exon 2 (harboring ATG translational start-site of SNCA)
of the SNCA gene were designed at http://crispr.mit.edu/ (Supp.Fig.5B). The gRNAs were
cloned into PX458 (Addgene, plasmid #62988), a single plasmid containing both sgRNA
and the Cas9 (pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP, following the protocol (Ran et al., 2013). CRISPRs
were then tested in 293T cells and cutting efficiency was determined by Sanger sequencing
and TIDE analysis (https://tide.deskgen.com: Supp.Fig.5C). Guide2: tgttttccagtgtggtgtaa,
Guide3: gtaaaggaattcattagcca, Guide4: gccatggatgtattcatgaa. Guide RNA 3 was chosen for
the final editing of SNCA copy reduction)
Transfection: iPS cells were cultured to 70% confluency and dissociated into single
cells using Accutase (StemCell Technologies, Cat. No, 07920). Cells were washed with
DMEM/F12 1:1 medium to remove Accutase. 1.0x106 cells were transfected with 2.5
μg of the CRISPR/Cas9 plasmid PX459 using Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent
(ThermoFisher, Cat. No. L3000015). The DNA-lipid complex was prepared following the
Lipofectamine 3000 Reagent Protocol and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes.
The single cells were resuspended to a minimal volume (eg. 1.0x106 cells in about 50 μl
medium) and the DNA-lipid complex was added dropwise to the cells. The cells were mixed
by gently flicking the tube wall 2-3 times and and then incubated at room temperature for
another 10 minutes. 2 ml prewarmed mTeSR1 medium supplemented with 10 μM Rock
inhibitors was added. Cells were moved into one well of a Matrigel-coated 6-well plate.
48-hour post transfection, cells were subjected to cell sorting and GFP positive cells were
collected and plated at clonal density (5k to 10k cells per 10 cm dish). In about 7-10 days,
colonies were picked into a 96-well plate and expanded for genotyping. In total, 60 clones
were selected for further analysis.
Genotyping: DNA for genotyping was extracted using the prepGEM® DNA Extraction
Kits (ZyGem, Cat. No. PT10050). PCR genotyping was performed using Phusion Green
Hot Start II High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher, Cat. No. F537) following
the manufacturer's instructions at an annealing temperature of 62 °C. The following
screening primers were designed flanking the CRISPR targeted SNCA exon2 site: F
5’TAGCCAAGATGGATGGGAGATG and R 5’CCATCACTCATGAACAAGCACC, which
was also used for Sanger sequencing. The indel rate was >80%. 19 clones with indels
resulting in significant deletions and/or potential ORF shifts were further investigated
via TOPO cloning using TOPO TA Cloning Kit for Subcloning (ThermoFisher, Cat. No.
450641), single clone PCR and Sanger sequencing. iPSC cells after Cas9 editing were
G-band karyotyped and checked for BCL2L1 locus copy number, a hotspot on chromosome
20 that confers growth advantage to pluripotent cells.
Evaluation of knock-out level: Candidate knock out clones were transfected with
PiggyBac TRE-NGN2-puromycin, then transdifferentiated to neurons (as described
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 32
below). SNCA expression level were determined by qRT-PCR using TaqMan primer
Hs00240906_m1 and western blotting using a monoclonal Antibody to αS (4B12) (Thermo
Fisher, Cat. No. MA1-90346).
SNCA-A53T iPSC reprogramming and genetic correction—The source fibroblasts
were from a female Contursi Kindred patient harboring the SNCA A53T mutation female
gender, age 49)(Chung et al., 2013). The iPSC were generated from fibroblasts obtained
from a patient skin biopsy at Boston University. A53T fibroblasts were collected under BU
protocol (#H-27479) and then cultured/reprogrammed/differentiated under MGH protocol
(#2009P000775) and MIT COUHES protocol (#0807002834). The line was licensed from
Whitehead to Yumanity and thereafter to BWH. The fibroblast to iPSC reprogramming
was performed at the Harvard Stem Cell Institute iPS Core following a microRNA-
enhanced mRNA reprogramming method by combining Stemgent mRNA Reprogramming
kit (00-0071) and Stemgent microRNA Booster Kit (00-0073) based on the manufacturer’s
protocol. All the QC was followed according to NYSCF protocols (Pauli et al., 2015). The
corrected clone (Corr28) and the original clone was PiggyBac transfected with VK_1018
plasmid all in one piggyBac(see below and TableS3 for the plasmid). Differentiation and
assays were performed as described below, similar to SNCA triplication line.
Ngn2 mediated neuronal differentiation of iPSCs
All-in-one PiggyBac plasmids: The following gene blocks were inserted between the
PiggyBac inverted repeats in 5’- >3’ order: 5' PiggyBac ITR, iA4 insulator sequence, bGH
poly(A) signal, Blasticidin cassette-2A linker-rtTA4 CDS (2A:self-cleaving peptide), hPGK
promotor, UCOE insulator, Tet Response Promotor, Gateway Cloning Cassette, Internal
Ribosome Entry Site, NGN2-2A-linker-Puromycin cassette, Woodchuck Proximal Response
Element (WPRA), hGH polyA signal, cHS4 insulator, iA2 insulator, 3' PiggyBac ITR. A
Thymidine Kinase expression cassette was inserted into the backbone of the plasmid for
negative selection of the non-transposition random insertions. Chromatin insulating factors
and both positive and negative selection markers improves the functionality of this plasmid.
This final plasmid (VK_1018) is used for transgenesis of iPSCs. Please see Fig.5A for
the depiction of this construct. A modified version of this construct designed to transfer
SNCA-Avi-BirA system was similarly generated. In this latter case, the construct expressed
a Tet-On module (4th generation), dox- inducible Ngn2, αS-Avi (or αS only as a negative
control) with an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) element along with a BirA ligase that
is expressed in mature neurons under the Synapsin promoter(see Fig.5C for depiction of this
construct).
NGN2 transgenesis into iPSCs by PiggyBac vector: One day before transfection, one
confluent well of iPSCs on a 6-well plate was dissociated with Accutase (Invitrogen:
E124759) and single-cell dissociated. The iPSCs were transferred to a 15-mL conical tube
and centrifuged at 800 rpm for 3 minutes. The iPS cell pellet was re-suspended, counted
and seeded at 1.5 million per well in 2 mL/well StemFlex with 10 μM Rock Inhibitor
in a new Matrigel-coated 6-well plate. On day of transfection, a transfection mixture was
prepared with 2 μg of the PiggyBac construct, 1.5μg transposase plasmid, and 10.5μL
TransIT-LT1 Transfection Reagent (Mirus: MIR2304) in 200μL Opti-MEM medium (Gibco:
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 33
31985062) per transfection. The transfection mixture was left in the hood for 20 minutes
at room temperature. For a well of iPSCs at ~70-80% confluence and in a single layer,
old media was replenished with 2mL fresh StemFlex supplemented with 10μM Rock
Inhibitor (PEPROTECH: 1293823-50MG). Subsequently, the 200μL transfection mixture
was added to the well evenly and dropwise. Transfected cells were incubated at 37°C
for 6 hours without disturbance, after which the transfection medium was replaced by
2mL fresh StemFlex supplemented with 10 μM Rock Inhibitor. Media change with 2mL
fresh StemFlex supplemented with 10μM Rock Inhibitor was performed daily. Two days
post transfection, 5 μg/mL Blasticidin was added to the StemFlex medium to select for
cells that successfully incorporated the backbone of the PiggyBac plasmid. The Blasticidin
selection was continued for 5 days and media change were performed daily. In cases in
which more than 80% cells died within the 5 days, Blasticidin selection was paused until
the well become confluent for further expansion. Beyond seven days post transfection,
Rock Inhibitor was taken out of the culturing media. Large batches of early-passage Ngn2
iPSC lines were generated and frozen down to minimize genetic drift and instability of
PiggyBac-transfected polyclonal lines. From these frozen starter lines, iPSC lines were not
passaged more than 3 times before differentiation.
iPSC neuronal differentiation up to Day0: Our differentiation protocols are described
in relation to the day of dox: Day0. 6-well plates were coated with 1mL of 80 μg/mL
Matrigel in DMEM/F12 (Gibco: 11330-032) at a minimum of two hours prior to cell
seeding. iPSCs previously frozen in 10% DMSO (Santa Cruz: SC-358801) in KnockOut
Serum (Gibco: 10828-028) were thawed into 2mL StemFlex (Gibco: A33493-01) with 10
μg/mL Rock Inhibitor (PEPROTECH: 1293823-50MG) per well in the Matrigel-coated
6-well plate. Cells were allowed to recover overnight at 37°C. Complete media change with
fresh StemFlex was carried out for iPSCs every day. As iPSCs reached ~70% confluency
(usually within one to two days post thawing), Blasticidin (InvivoGen: ANT-BL-1) was
added to StemFlex at 5 μg/mL concentration to select for cells with the PiggyBac backbone.
To match confluency levels of iPSCs and correct for distinct growth rates across lines, iPSC
lines were passaged at different ratios as they reached ~90% to 100% confluency. To passage
iPSCs, each well on a 6-well plate was washed with 1mL DPBS-EDTA (1 mM) (Ultrapure
0.5M EDTA, pH8.0 (Invitrogen: 15575-038) DPBS (Gibco: 21-031-CV)). The iPSCs were
incubated in another 1mL of 1mM EDTA in DPBS at room temperature for 3 to 4 minutes,
depending on the confluency. 1mM EDTA in DPBS was removed and iPSCs were lifted
from the wells in 1mL StemFlex and distributed across wells. Immediately before Day 0 of
induced cortical neuronal differentiation, control and experimental iPSC lines were kept at
similar confluency to control for growth stage and cell cycle.
iPSC neuronal differentiation after Day0: On Day0 of differentiation, iPSCs were
washed with DPBS, then dissociated with Accutase (Invitrogen: E124759) and re-suspended
in StemFlex with 10 μg/mL Rock Inhibitor and 0.5 μg/mL dox (Sigma: D9891-5G).
The iPSCs were counted and seeded at 10 million per Matrigel-coated 10-cm plate or
~1.25-1.5 million per well of a Matrigel-coated 6-well plate. Starting from Day 1, StemFlex
medium was completely removed and replaced with Neurobasal Complete medium with 0.5
μg/mL dox and 5 μg/mL Blasticidin. Neurobasal Complete formulation: 500mL Neurobasal
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 34
(Gibco: 21103049), 10mL of B27 supplement (Gibco, 17504044), 5mL N2 supplement
(Life Technology: 17502-048), 5mL Non-Essential Amino Acids (Gibco: 11140-050), 5mL
GlutaMAX (Gibco: 35050-061), and 5mL Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco: 15140-122)).
From Day 2 to Day 6, complete media change was performed daily with 0.5 μg/mL
dox and 5 μg/mL Puromycin (InvivoGen: ANT-PR-1), which selects for cells expressing
the Ngn2 construct, in Neurobasal medium. On Day 7, differentiated neurons were lifted
with Accutase, counted, and re-plated into final plates. For routine biochemistry, Poly-L-
Ornithine/Laminin pre-coated multi-well plates (Corning: 354658 or 354659) were used
for differentiation after day 7. For imaging, 96-well glass bottom imaging plates (Brooks:
MGB096-1-2-LG-L) were coated with 0.1%(v/v) Poly-ethylenimine in 50 mM Borate buffer
(PEI; Fisher: 24765-1, 20X Borate Buffer; Fisher: 28341) overnight at 4°C. Following
overnight PEI coating and at least two hours prior to re-plating Day 7 neurons, 96-well
plates were washed twice with distilled water and once with 1X DPBS, as PEI is toxic to the
cells. Washed plates were further coated with Laminin (Sigma: L2020-1MG) in 1X DPBS
with Magnesium and Calcium (Gibco: 14040-133) at 37°C. Final concentration for laminin
was at least 5 μg/ml. Neurons were re-plated in the final plates at the same density as the
seeding density on Day 0. For 96-well plates, Day 7 neurons were seeded at 30,000-50,000
cells per well (higher densities cause clustering making image analysis difficult).
Day7 seeding medium composition was Neurobasal complete medium supplemented
with 0.5 ug/ml dox and 10 uM Rock inhibitor. On Day 8, an equal volume
of Neurobasal complete medium supplemented with BDNF(Peprotech: 450-02),
GDNF(Peprotech: 450-10), cAMP(Sigma: D0260-100MG), Laminin, and AraC was added
(final concentrations were: 2x Laminin; 2 ug/ml, 2x cAMP; 1mM, 2x BDNF; 20 ng/ml,
2x GDNF; 20 ng/ml, 2x AraC; 1uM). From Day8, media change was performed every
three days. On Day 11, a final complete media change was performed with 1:1 Neurobasal/
Neurobasal Plus medium supplemented with BDNF, GDNF, cAMP and Laminin. From Day
14, half media changes with Neurobasal Plus medium supplemented with BDNF, GDNF,
cAMP, and Laminin were carried out until Day 56 (Week 8) at the latest. Note that when
Neurobasal plus medium was used, B27 Plus supplement (Gibco, A3582801) was used to
make the complete media. Neurons in 6-well or 24-well plates were washed and harvested
with 1X DPBS. Those neurons were pelleted at 400g, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and
stored at −80°C for subsequent assays.
Immunofluorescence (IF) in iPSC-derived human neurons—Day 21 (three-week-
old) neurons seeded on PEI and Laminin coated 96-well glass bottom microplates were
fixed in 4% PFA (16% Paraformaldehyde; EM Grade (EM Sciences; Cat#: 15710;
Lot:180910-04) in 1X DPBS with 20% Sucrose (10X DPBS, Invitrogen: AM9625) for 15
minutes at room temperature, washed twice with 1X DPBS, and stored in 0.02% NaAzide in
1X DPBS and sealed with aluminum tape (Corning® 96-well Microplate Aluminum Sealing
Tape, 6570) at 4°C if not immediately proceeded to subsequent IF and imaging. To start the
IF process, the fixed neurons were further washed three times with 1X DPBS for 5 minutes
each. The neurons were then permeabilized (PBS 0.5% Triton X-100) for 15 minutes and
blocked (5% BSA, 0.05% Triton-X100 (Sigma: T8787)) for 1 hour @RT. Primary antibody
incubation (200 μl blocking solution with primary antibody) was carried out in dark 4°C
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 35
overnight, no shaking. The neurons were washed 3 times with 1X DPBS for 5 minutes each
@RT and incubated for 1 hour @RT in dark with secondary Alexa conjugated (488 nm
or 594 nm) antibodies (1:1000x diluted in blocking solution). The neurons were washed
once with 1X DPBS and incubated for 10 minutes with PBS-Hoechst solution (2000x fold
dilution to PBS from commercial stock, Hoechst 33342, Invitrogen H3570) at @RT, and
then further washed twice for 5 minutes each. The plate was sealed with aluminum tape and
imaged immediately. The images were acquired by Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope,
with 40X Plan Apo dry objective (MRD0045) and Andor Zyla 4.2P sCMOS camera (No
binning, 200 MHz readout rate, 12 bit & Gain4 dynamic range). For cultured cortical
neurons, 7 Z-stacks were acquired within a 2 μm range. For image processing, FIJI software
was used. Separate channel stacks were Z-projected (maximum intensity) and ROIs (Region
of interest) were selected from each field manually unless otherwise stated.
Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA) in iPSC derived human neurons—Duolink™
In Situ Orange Starter Kit Mouse/Rabbit (Sigma: DUO92102) was used for this assay.
Same 96-well plate was used and identical IF procedures were performed until the
permeabilization step, after which the permeabilized neurons were blocked in Duolink™
Blocking Solution (80 μL/well; vortex well before use) for one hour at 37°C (in a Tissue
Culture incubator). Primary antibodies were diluted in the Duolink™ Antibody Diluent
(vortex well before use) to normal IF concentrations (refer to antibody Table S5 for details)
and 80 μL of corresponding diluted primary antibody solution was added to each well. For
PLA negative controls only one of the primary antibodies was processed. The plate was
sealed tight with aluminum tape to prevent dehydration and incubate at 4°C overnight. 1X
Wash Buffers A and B were made according to Duolink™ manufacturer protocol. In short,
each wash buffer pouch was dissolved in 1L autoclaved MiliQ water. The wash buffers
were stored in dark at 4°C and were brought to RT before use. Following overnight primary
antibody incubation, the neurons were washed twice with 1X Wash Buffer A (200 μL/well)
@RT for 5 minutes each. PLUS and MINUS PLA Probes were diluted 1:5 in pre-vortexed
Duolink™ Antibody Diluent accordingly. The neurons were incubated in the diluted PLA
probe solution for one hour at 37°C and subsequently washed twice with 1X Wash Buffer
A @RT. 5X Ligation Buffer was thawed and diluted to 1X with Ultrapure distilled water
(Invitrogen: 10977-015) immediately before use and Ligase was added to the freshly made
1X Ligation Buffer at 1:40 dilution. The neurons were incubated in the ligase solution for
30 minutes at 37°C. Following the ligation step, the neurons were washed twice with 1X
Wash Buffer A @RT. 5X Amplification Buffer was thawed and diluted to 1X with UltraPure
distilled water immediately before use and Polymerase was added to the freshly made 1X
Ligation Buffer at 1:80 dilution. The neurons were incubated in the ligase solution for 100
minutes at 37°C. After amplification, the neurons were washed twice with 1X Wash Buffer
B (200 μL/well) @RT for 10 minutes each and further washed once with 0.01X Wash
Buffer B (diluted in UltraPure distilled water) @RT for 2 minutes. The neurons were then
incubated with PBS-Hoechst solution (2000x fold dilution to PBS from commercial stock,
Hoechst 33342, Invitrogen) at @RT for 10 minutes, and further washed with 1X DPBS
twice for 5 minutes each. The plate was sealed with aluminum tape and imaged immediately.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 36
High content image acquisition for iPSC derived neurons—High content image
acquisition (for IF and PLA) was performed on the aluminum tape-sealed, glass-bottom 96-
welll plates with the High Content (HC) Module of Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope,
with 40X Plan Apo dry objective (MRD0045) and Andor Zyla 4.2P sCMOS camera (No
binning, 200 MHz readout rate, 12 bit & Gain4 dynamic range), which matches manual
acquisition settings using the same Nikon microscope. Z-stack settings were also kept the
same as used in manual acquisitions for cortical neurons and HEK293 cells, respectively.
A new project was set up for each well so that there was no plate movement across wells.
For consistency, same exposure time and Zyla settings was kept identical for all acquired
channels across each experimental group. ~40-70 images (positions or field of image) were
acquired for each well in a regular pattern and in a meandering direction within a centrally
restricted area of the well to avoid edge effect. X/Y distance between positions was wide
enough with no overlap to ensure that each position was well isolated and statistically
independent for subsequent analysis. The Nikon Perfect Focus System (PFS) was used for
all HC acquisitions to ensure every image taken was well in focus, while autofocus was
kept off to avoid potential confusions and variabilities. Z-position and PFS offset were set
up for each well manually. PFS was set to automatically turn on as the plate moving across
positions and to stay off during acquisition. FIJI macros (custom written) were used to
analyze HC images. file and to perform intensity projection (Extended Depth of Focus, i.e.,
EDF) for individual channels. For either PLA puncta counting or P-body puncta counting in
neurons, each imaging field went through these processes;
a. High content data was split into individual imaging fields
b. z-Stacks were projected with EDF (Extended Depth of Focus).
c. A cell mask is created based on Hoechst staining and 5um perimeter of the
nucleus. For neurons, we could not find a reliable neurite mask. The high density
of the neurons, their clustering in the later days of culturing made individual
neurite masking impossible. The most reliable counts of P-bodies or their PLA
signal, in our estimation, were the ones around the nucleus. Furthermore, the
neuritic debris could also auto fluoresce, making it harder to differentiate signals
from false positives.
d. Very bright nucleus signals were omitted as they represent dead cells
e. Puncta ROIs were counted within the cell mask
f. The data per each image is always represented as total puncta counts / Cell ROI
counts. Therefore, the data is represented as the average density of puncta per
image.
Generation of αS PFFs (Preformed fibrils)—For PFF generation, Michael J.Fox
Foundation guidelines were followed. Purified and lyophilized αS monomers were a kind
gift from Tim Bartels. The lyophilized monomers (1 mg) were resuspended in filtered
150 ul PBS and centrifuged for 10 minutes at full speed to get rid of the residual large
aggregates. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh protein-low binding tube. The
protein concentration was measured both by BCA assay and nanodrop (parameters; E/1000=
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 37
5960.00 and MW = 14.50) with several technical repeats and geometric mean of two assays
were accepted as the protein concentration (3.518 mg/ml). The resuspended protein was put
in a thermo-shaker at 37°C with heated lid option to avoid condensation and shook for 1
week at constant speed of 1000 rpm. The aggregation was visually checked after the third
day each day for a typical cloud formation indicating protein condensation. After a week,
the fibrils were aliquoted in small volumes to protein low binding tubes, dried on dry ice and
kept at −80°C until further use.
For the fibril application on the cells, the PFFs were first sonicated to generate toxic
protofibrils with the following settings: (Bioruptor, 4°C, High Setting, 10 cycle, 30 seconds
ON, 30 seconds OFF). To check the status of sonicated and unsonicated PFFs, TEM images
were taken. For TEM imaging, 4μl of the sample was adsorbed for 1 minute to a carbon
coated grid (EMS www.emsdiasum.com order# CF400-CU) that had been made hydrophilic
by a 20 or 30 second exposure to a glow discharge (25mA). Excess liquid was wicked
on a filter paper (Whatman #1). The grid was floated briefly on a drop of water (to wash
away phosphate or salt), wicked on a Whatman filter paper and then stained with 0.75%
uranyl formate (EMS catalog # 22451) or 1% Uranyl Acetate (EMS catalog # 22400) for
20-30 seconds. After removing the excess stain with a filter paper, the grids were examined
in a JEOL 1200EX Transmission electron microscope or a TecnaiG2 Spirit BioTWIN and
images were recorded with an AMT 2k CCD camera.
ActinomycinD Pulse time course in iPSC induced neurons—The experiment
was performed on SNCA 4 copy and SNCA 2-copy (CRISPR corrected isogenic line, as
described in detail above). The genotypes of the cell lines were ensured by western blot.
ActD (final concentration 10 μg/ml) was applied on day21 neurons. Time points at 0 hour
(no addition of ActD), 1,3,6 and 12 hours were taken for RNA isolation. In total 60 samples
(2 genotypes X 5 time points X 2 treatment (PFF) X 3 replicates) were processed for RNA
isolation with Trizol method. Each sample comes from a well of 24 well plate with ~50K
neurons. For the PFF treatment, Day14 neurons were treated with 5 ug/ml sonicated PFF.
Each well was incubated with 1 ml of Trizol and rotated on an orbital shaker for 10 minutes.
The Trizol was kept at −80°C until processing. The RNA from Trizol mix was recovered
by PureLink RNA Mini kit (Invitrogen, cat#: 12183020) with on column DNAse digestion.
Additionally, initial viscosity was removed by Qiashredder. The purity, concentration and
the integrity of the RNA samples were confirmed with NanoDrop and TapeStation. 1 μl of
total RNA was diluted 20-fold and measured with Agilent TapeStation 2200 according to
manufacturer’s protocol using regular RNA Screen Tapes (Agilent: 5067-5576) or measured
with nanodrop. 12 samples were taken to estimate the RIN value of the general quality
of the samples (all RIN values were above 9.5). For library preparation, 300 ng of the
total RNA was used from each sample. Sample libraries were prepared for RNA-Seq using
KAPA Biosystems KAPA mRNA Hyperprep Kit, according to manufacturer’s directions.
Briefly, total RNA (300 ng per sample) was enriched for polyadenylated sequences using
oligo-dT magnetic bead capture. The enriched mRNA fraction was then fragmented, and
first-strand cDNA was generated using random primers. Strand specificity was achieved
during second-strand cDNA synthesis by replacing dTTP with dUTP, which quenches the
second strand during amplification. The resulting cDNA was A-Tailed and ligated with
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 38
indexed adapters. Finally, the library was amplified using a DNA Polymerase which cannot
incorporate past dUTPs, effectively quenching the second strand during PCR. Indexing was
achieved using the KAPA Dual Indexing plate.
RNA sequencing data analysis pipeline—RNA-seq raw files in FASTQ format
were processed in a customized pipeline. For each sample, we first filtered out reads
that failed vendor check or are too short (<15nt) after removing the low-quality ends
or possible adaptor contamination by using fastq-mcf with options of “-t 0 -x 10 -l 15
-w 4 -q 10 -u”. We then checked the quality using FastQC for the remaining reads.
Reads were then mapped to the human genome (GRCh38/hg38) using STAR (Dobin and
Gingeras, 2015) (v 2.7.3) by allowing up to 10% mismatches per pair and 100 multiple
hits. Gene expression levels were quantified in both FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase of
transcript per Million mapped reads) and in raw reads count. FPKM were estimated using
cufflinks (Trapnell et al., 2012) (v2.2.1) by enabling multi-mapped read correction and
masking out the reads mapped to the mitochondrial genome, rRNAs, and tRNAs. Raw
reads counts were estimated by htseq-count (Anders et al., 2015)with the parameters of “-m
intersection-strict -t exon -i gene_id -s no”. We used GENCODE (v37) as gene annotation
and GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa downloaded from EBI FTP as reference genome.
Sample QC based on RNA-seq data—We made RLE plot to detect sample outliers.
In brief, for each gene and each sample, ratios are calculated between the expression of a
gene and the median expression of this gene across all samples of the experiment. For each
sample, these relative expression values are displayed as a box plot. Since it is assumed
that in most experiments only relatively few genes are differentially expressed, the boxes
should be similar in range and be centered close to 0. We also calculated pair-wise Spearman
correlations of gene expression quantification across samples and measured the median
correlation (D-statistics) for each sample. Samples with D-statistics markedly different from
the rest of samples were deemed outliers. Moreover, we investigated the variance among the
samples by running PCA based on the top 500 most variable genes.
Condition-specific time-series RNA-Seq analysis—To examine genes that show
condition-specific expression pattern along the time points, we performed LRT (likelihood
ratio test) by removing the condition:timepoint interaction term in the reduced model (e.g.
full model as ~ condition + timepoint + condition:timepoint and reduced model as ~
condition + timepoint). The design above controls for differences between condition at
time=0, and then tests to see if there are any differences at one or more time points after
time 0. We tested this globally by including all time points and locally by only including two
consecutive timepoints. Condition-specific time-series LRT tests were conducted for both
genotypes (e.g., SNCA 2 copies vs. 4 copies) and PFF treatment (e.g., PFF+ vs. PFF). To
test if any globe difference in slope between conditions (e.g., PFF+ vs. PFF−), we performed
paired one-sided t-test of the slope between two consecutive time points for all genes. The
statistical tests were conducted using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) (v1.30.1) in R (4.0.3).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 39
Immunofluorescence assays in Post-mortem Brains
Acquisition of brain samples : Post-mortem brain samples were acquired from Mayo
Clinic. Two patients with PD diagnosis (male, 63, for SNCA gene duplication; male,57, for
SNCA A53T) and two healthy control cases free from PD diagnosis (male,81 and male,78)
were investigated. The details of the cases could be found in TableS7. Brain tissue was fixed
in formalin and processed for paraffin embedding. Sections were cut at 6 micron and stored
at room temperature for microscopy analysis.
Antibodies: Anti-MAP2 antibody (Millipore, AB5543) used at 1:1000 concentration,
anti-Edc4 (Abcam, ab72408) used at 1:200 concentration, anti-Dcp1a (Abnova, H00055802-
M06), used at 1:200 concentration, anti-SNCA (BD Transduction, 610787), used at 1:500
concentration.
Immunofluorescence assay: Immunofluorescence staining of the proteins of interest
were performed in human brain tissue sections as previously described by Keeney et al.
(Keeney et al., 2021). Briefly, human brain tissue sections were deparaffinized and, to
quench autofluorescence, the sections were incubated in sudan black for 5 min at room
temperature. The sections were then permeabilized and incubated with specific primary
antibodies (see above for antibody dilutions) to the proteins to be detected. Fluorescent
secondary antibodies were added to the reaction and incubated. Confocal microcopy for the
detection of the proteins of interest was performed in MAP2-positive cells
Proximity Ligation Assay(PLA): PLA (DUO92004-100RXN; DUO92002-100RXN;
DUO92007-100RXN, Sigma-Aldrich) was performed in paraffin-embedded fixed tissue
prepared for immunofluorescence, as described above. To detect neurons in brain, an
immunofluorescence staining for MAP2 was performed before PLA, then samples were
incubated with specific primary antibodies to the proteins of interest for PLA. Secondary
antibodies conjugated with oligonucleotides were added to the reaction and incubated.
Ligation solution, consisting of two oligonucleotides and ligase, was added. In this assay,
the oligonucleotides hybridize to the two proximity ligation probes and join to a closed
loop if they are in close proximity. Amplification solution, consisting of nucleotides
and fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides, were added together with polymerase. The
oligonucleotide arm of one of the proximity ligation probes acts as a primer for “rolling-
circle amplification” using the ligated circle as a template, and this generates a concatemeric
product. Fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides hybridize to the rolling circle amplification
product. The proximity ligation signal was visible as a distinct fluorescent spot and was
analyzed by confocal microscopy. Control experiments were run in parrallel by primary
antibodies deletion. For more details and step-by-step protocol see(Keeney et al., 2021).
Fluorescence measurements: Quantitative fluorescence measurements were made with an
Olympus upright 3-laser scanning confocal microscope, taking care to ensure that images
contained no saturated pixels. For quantitative comparisons, all imaging parameters (e.g.,
laser power, exposure, pinhole) were held constant across specimens. Olympus Fluoview
1000 Software was used for the analysis.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 40
Statistical analyses: Each result presented here was derived from 4 cohorts of human
cortex specimen (2 controls, SNCA A53T mutation, SNCA duplication mutation). 4 – 5
sections for each cohort were analyzed. Each number is representative of the fluorescence
intensity detected in ROIs plotted on single neurons (MAP 2 positive). For comparisons
of multiple experimental conditions, 1-way ANOVA was used, and if significant overall,
post hoc corrections (Bonferroni or Sidak) for multiple pairwise comparisons were made
(GraphPad PRISM). P-values less than 0.05 were considered significant. All graphs show
the statistical distribution of each point.
Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project (ROS/MAP) analysis
Study subjects: Postmortem data analyzed in this study were gathered as part of the
Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project (ROS/MAP) (Bennett et al., 2012a,
2012b; Jager et al., 2018), two longitudinal cohort studies of the elderly, one from across
the United States and the other from the greater Chicago area. All subjects were recruited
free of dementia (mean age at entry=78±8.7 (SD) years) and signed an Anatomical Gift
Act allowing for brain autopsy at time of death. Written informed consent was obtained
from all ROS/MAP participants and study protocols were approved by the Rush University
Institutional Review Board.
Clinical evaluation: A clinical diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease was determined at time
of death by a neurologist with expertise in dementia, blinded to all postmortem data. To
reach consensus on particular subjects, case conferences were held including one or more
neurologists and a neuropsychologist. In addition, a global parkinsonian summary score
was derived as the average of four separate domains calculated from the 26-item modified
version of the motor section of the United Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (including
bradykinesia, gait, rigidity, and tremor scores).
Neuropathological evaluation: All subjects’ brains were examined postmortem by a
board-certified neuropathologist blinded to clinical data. Brains were removed in a standard
fashion as previously described (Bennett et al., 2006). Each brain was cut into 1cm coronal
slabs. Slabs from one hemisphere, and slabs from the other hemisphere not designated
for rapid freezing, were fixed for at least three days in 4% paraformaldehyde. Tissue
blocks from eight brain regions were processed, embedded in paraffin, cut into either
6 micron or 20μm sections, and mounted on glass slides. Lewy body pathology was
measured by immunostaining, as described(Schneider et al., 2012). Briefly, Lewy bodies
in substantia nigra and cortex were separately identified, with only intracytoplasmic Lewy
bodies indicating positive staining. To simplify the staging of pathology, the McKeith
criteria (McKeith, 2006) were modified such that nigral predominant Lewy body pathology
included cases with Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra without evidence of Lewy bodies
in the limbic or neocortical regions. Limbic-type Lewy body disease included cases with
either anterior cingulate or entorhinal positivity without neocortical Lewy body pathology.
Neocortical-type Lewy body pathology required Lewy bodies in either midfrontal, temporal,
or inferior parietal cortex with either nigral or limbic positivity, but often with both. Based
on this, each subject was assigned to one of four mutually exclusive categories: 0 = no, 1
= nigral-predominant, 2 = limbic-type or 3 = neocortical-type Lewy body pathology. An
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 41
additional binary indicator of Lewy bodies, present vs. absent overall, was also derived.
Finally, the degree of neuronal loss in the substantia nigra was quantified in the mid to
rostral midbrain near or at the exit of the 3rd nerve using H&E stain using a four-staged
scale (0=none/rare/scattered, 1=mild, 2=moderate, 3=severe), as described(Buchman et al.,
2012). Further descriptions of clinical and pathological outcomes are available at the Rush
Alzheimer’s Disease Centre Research Resource Sharing Hub (https://www.radc.rush.edu).
Sample preparation and RNA sequencing: Tissue for RNA sequencing (RNAseq) was
dissected from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) using a strand-specific dUTP method
(Levin et al., 2010) with poly-A selection (Adiconis et al., 2013). Five micrograms of total
RNA as measured by RiboGreen at a concentration of 50 nanogram/microliter with RNA
Integrity Number (RIN) score of 5 or better were submitted for cDNA library construction.
Sequencing was carried out using the Illumina HiSeq2000 with 101 bp paired end reads for
a targeted coverage of 50M paired reads.
RNA sequencing data processing and quality control: Ten batches of paired-end (101bp
reads) RNAseq data were processed separately using the same pipeline, as previously
published(Felsky et al., 2020). Briefly, 1) fastq file quality control was performed using
FastQC v0.11.5 (default parameters), 2) STAR v2.5.3a (Dobin et al., 2013) was used
to align reads (GRCh38.91 reference), 3) RSEM v1.2.31(Li and Dewey, 2011) was
used to quantify expression from aligned BAM files, and 4) multiqc v1.5 (Ewels et
al., 2016) was used to aggregate quality metrics from fastqc and Picard tools V2.17.4
(http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/), 5) quality reports were examined for each batch
and exclusion of samples was initially carried out according to manual identification of
outlying samples primarily considering low numbers of aligned reads, excess GC coverage
bias, high percentage of read duplicates, and abnormal distribution of read assignments
across genomic annotations. For Post-quantification QC, expected counts were aggregated
across all batches and used as input to limma (v3.38.3)(Ritchie et al., 2015) voom in R
(v3.5.2) (Law et al., 2014). First, any genes with a median expected count lower or equal
to 15 were excluded. Second, principal components analyses were performed on each batch
separately, and subjects flagged for pruning if deviating from the sample median of any of
the first 5 principal components by more than 3 interquartile ranges. Third, gene expected
counts were log2 transformed with an offset of 0.5 and each gene evaluated for extreme
outlying observations separately. For each gene, any log2(expected count) value deviating
from the sample median by 3 interquartile ranges was coerced to its nearest most extreme
value within that range. This resulted in a final set of 17 675 genes and 596 subjects for
differential expression analyses.
Differential expression analysis: For each PD-related outcome, the R (v3.6.3) limma
package ‘lmFit’ function was used to model log2(expected counts) as a linear function
including sequencing batch, age at death, sex, RIN, postmortem interval, percent duplicated
reads, and median 3’ bias as covariates. Robust linear modeling was used (using Huber
M estimators), allowing for a high number (10,000) of iterations to reach convergence.
Significance for effects of pathological variables on gene expression was determined using
empirical Bayes moderation (the ‘eBayes’ function).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 42
Rank-Based Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment of differential expression results: For
each set of differential expression summary statistics, genes were ranked based on
their moderated t-statistics. AUC-based enrichment was then performed using the R
tmod package (version 0.46.2) (3rd and Domaszewska, 2016)to test for GO term
enrichment including categories of biological processes, cellular components, and molecular
functions(Ashburner et al., 2000). Thus, an AUC greater than 0.5 indicates a GO group
enriched for overexpression, and an AUC less than 0.5 indicates a group enriched
for underexpression in relation to each outcome measure. Annotations were limited to
those including between 10-200 tested genes. GO annotations were extracted from the
org.Hs.eg.db and GO.db (version 3.10.0) R packages, using the full background of genes
passing QC for differential expression. unbiased FDR correction was used (q<0.05) to
determine significant enrichment. To minimize redundancy between these broad categories,
we limited our final aggregation of GO terms to biological processes only and condensed
semantically-overlapping groups using the REVIGO(Supek et al., 2011) tool (dispensability
<0.1) to enhance interpretability.
Human Genetics; BridGE analysis in PD and ALS cohorts
Validating P-body biological interactions in human genome-wide association
studies: To evaluate biological interactions that are associated with disease risk, we adapted
the recently published method, BridGE (Fang et al., 2019). BridGE enables identification
of statistical associations with disease risk through collectively analyzing SNPs linked to
gene pairs of interest (in this case taken from a set including P-body genes and SNCA). The
rationale is that association can be more readily detected by aggregating multiple individual
SNP-SNP interactions mapping to the corresponding two genes than by considering SNPs
within the genes taken individually. The software for this analysis is available at https://
github.com/csbio/BridGE/tree/master/BridGE_genes.
GWAS data: We obtained seven GWAS cohorts for PD including a total of 11,830
PD cases and 11,030 PD controls, and four GWAS cohorts for ALS disease including
a total of 3,275 ALS cases and 11,556 ALS controls (TableS7). Six of the PD cohorts
are downloaded from the dbGaP website, under phs000196.v3.p1 (PD-NGRC) (Hamza
et al., 2010), phs000089.v3.p2 (PD-NIA)(Fung et al., 2006; Simon-Sanchez et al.,
2007), phs000048.v1.p1 (PD-LEAPS) (Maraganore et al., 2005), phs000918.v1.p1 (PD-
IPDGC) (Auer et al., 2012; (IPDGC) and (WTCCC2), 2011; Nalls et al., 2014, 2015),
phs000126.v2.p1 (PD-CIDR) (Nichols et al., 2005), phs000394 (PD-APDGC)(Beecham et
al., 2015). The last PD cohort is from The Accelerating Medicines Partnership program
for Parkinson's disease (PD-AMP). The ALS cohorts are also downloaded from the
dbGaP web site, under phs000127.v2.p1 (ALS-Irish)(Cronin et al., 2008), phs000344.v1.p1
(ALS-Finland)(Laaksovirta et al., 2010), and phs000101.v3.p1(Chiò et al., 2009). For the
phs000101.v3.p1 dataset, we merged data genotyped with the Illumina HumanHap550 and
the Human610 platforms and analyzed it as a single cohort (ALS-NIH-HumanHap). The
last ALS cohort was formed from those samples from phs000101.v3.p1 that were genotyped
with Illumina OmniExpress (ALS-NIH-OmniExpress).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 43
P-body gene set: We included the following 53 P-body-related genes in our analysis:
PNRC2, DCP2, EDC3, EDC4, DCP1B, DCP1A, NBDY, 4E-T, DDX6, EIF4ENIF1,
LSM14A, LSM14B, PATL1, IGF2BP2, PAN2, PAN3, CNOT1, CNOT10, CNOT11,
CNOT2, CNOT3, CNOT4, CNOT6, CNOT6L, CNOT7, CNOT8, CNOT9, XRN1, LSM1,
LSM2, LSM3, LSM4, LSM5, LSM6, LSM7, AGO2, TNRC6A, TNRC6B, TNRC6C,
MOV10, FMR1, AGO1, ZCCHC3, SMG7, UPF1, UPF2, APOBEC3G, APOBEC3F,
ZCCHC11, SYNCRIP, HNRNPU, IGF2BP1, DHX9
GWAS data processing: We followed a standard GWAS data processing procedure. First,
we removed the SNPs with a minor allele frequency less than 0.05, missing genotype rate
greater than 0.02, or those for which a Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test resulted in p < 10−6.
We also removed samples that had a missing genotype rate greater than 0.02, or with genetic
relatedness to other samples (proportion IBD score greater than 0.2). We also removed
outlier samples based on multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis using the European
ancestry from 1000 genome project as reference (Fang et al., 2019). Then, we matched
each case with a control to control confounding due to population structure as previously
described in (Fang et al., 2019). The number of cases and controls after data processing
for each individual cohort can be found in Table S7. We binarized the data based on two
genetic models, recessive and dominant. We did not consider an additive genetic model since
BridGE previously discovered very few significant pathway-level interactions when using an
additive model (Fang et al., 2019).
SNP-to-gene mapping: A SNP is assigned to a gene based on its physical location in the
genome. We assigned each SNP to any upstream and downstream gene within 50kb.
Measuring association through SNP-SNP pairwise analysis: Genetic associations are
identified by considering the joint presence of SNPs in genes, taken pairwise, among
which biological interactions are known to occur. These associations are not identifiable
by considering individual SNP contributions to phenotype. We applied a modified version
of the hygeSSI interaction score originally proposed in BridGE (Fang et al., 2019). Given a
binary-coded SNP pair (S, S) and a binary class label C, the modified-hygeSSI measures
x y
the genetic interaction between two SNPs S and S as follows:
x y
P11Sx,Sy,C
−log10
modified‐hygeSSICSx,Sy min P10Sx,Sy,C, P01Sx,Sy,C, P00Sx,Sy,C
0; P11>α,P10,P01,P00≤α
Where P , P , P , and P are hypergeometric test p-values that represent the strength of
11 10 01 00
the genotype-phenotype association for corresponding binarized genotype combinations 11,
10, 01, and 00. α is a nominal p-value threshold (α = 0.05).
Construction of SNP-SNP interaction networks: For each SNP pair, we assume that
biological interactions will be reflected through different types of gene-gene interactions
including recessive-recessive (RR), recessive-dominant (RD), dominant-dominant (DD), as
well as a combined interaction score that is the maximum of the three. We then built a
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 44
SNP-SNP interaction network for each of the RR, RD, DD, and combined interactions.
More details on network construction are described in (Fang et al., 2019).
Measuring gene-gene interactions and evaluating significance: For each pair of genes
evaluated, we measured putative gene-gene interactions as follows. First, a gene-gene
interaction density score was summarized by averaging all SNP-SNP pairwise interaction
scores associated with the two genes, excluding any SNPs that are linked to both genes.
We also removed interactions for gene pairs that show evidence of Linkage Disequilibrium
(LD). Specifically, if two SNPs X and Y are in LD (r2 > 0.2), and they show evidence
of shared interactions (genetic interaction profile cosine similarity > 0.5), we assigned a
genetic interaction score of 0 to all X or Y-associated SNP pairs. Second, we computed a
p-value associated with the density of SNP-SNP interactions observed between each pair
of genes by comparing the observed distribution of SNP-SNP scores with a background
distribution consisting of all SNP-SNP interactions including either of the genes a using
Wilcoxon rank-sum Test. Third, we permuted the case-control labels 1000 times to generate
a null distribution of the two scores for each gene-gene interaction (the density and the
rank-sum p-value) to derive a single, empirical p-value per gene pair. Finally, we apply the
Benjamini–Hochberg method on these empirical p-values to control FDR, accounting for all
gene pairs tested. The resulting FDR per gene pair is the focus of our results.
Replicating putative gene-gene interactions: For each disease cohort, we discovered
gene-gene interactions from each of the SNP-SNP interaction networks constructed based on
different genetic models (RR, RD, DD, combined). Replicated gene-gene interactions were
defined as interactions that satisfy FDR <= 0.1 in at least one of the SNP-SNP interaction
networks in one cohort and have a permutation p-value <= 0.05 in at least two other cohorts.
We report such interactions for each disease.
Discovery of pathway-level associations among SNCA and P-body genes in PD: At a
cutoff of FDR < 0.1, under our model assumptions, we found interactions among SNCA
and a total of 28 P-body genes, taken pairwise, across the seven analyzed PD cohorts
(Table S7). The number of discoveries from each individual cohort can be found in Table
S7. Among these discovered interactions, 23 of them could be replicated in at least two
independent cohorts, and 20 of them were associated with increased risk for PD. This
degree of connectivity was statistically significant when we compared it with the number
of replicated interactions derived from 1000 sample permutations in which we repeated the
entire discovery process with the same gene-pairs (permutation p-value=0.001).
Analogous analysis between FUS and P-body genes in ALS: At a cutoff of FDR < 0.1,
we found analogous interactions between FUS and a total of 14 P-body genes across the four
analyzed ALS cohorts (Table S7). The number of discoveries from each individual cohort
can be found in Table S7. None of these 14 interactions could be replicated in two or more
additional cohorts. Three of these 14 increased-risk interactions could be replicated in one
independent cohort.
Analogous analysis between TARDBP and P-body genes in ALS: At a cutoff of FDR <
0.1, we found analogous interactions between TARDBP and a total 18 P-body genes across
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 45
the four analyzed ALS cohorts (Table S7). The number of discoveries from each individual
cohort can be found in Table S7. Among these discovered interactions, only 1 decreased-risk
interaction meets our replication criteria in at least two independent datasets (permutation
p-value=0.09). Four of these 18 interactions could be replicated in one independent cohort.
BridGE acknowledgements: The authors thank the NIH-designated data repository
(dbGaP: The database of Genotypes and Phenotypes), and the submitting investigators
who submitted data from the original studies to the dbGap repository: phs000196.v3.p1
(Dr. Haydeh Payami), phs000089.v3.p2 (Dr. Robert Brown, Dr. David Simon, Dr. Dennis
Dickson, Dr. Matthew Farrer, Dr. Emily Gorbold, Dr. Ira Shoulson, Dr. John A. Hardy,
Dr. Laura Marsh, Dr. Michael Okun, Dr. Ted Roghstein, Dr. Zbigniew Wszolek),
phs000048.vl.pl (Dr. Demetrius M. Maraganore), phs000126.v2.p1(Dr. Tatiana Foroud,
Dr. Richard H. Myers), phs000918.v1.p1 (Dr. Andrew B. Singleton, Dr. Mike A. Nalls),
phs000394.v1.p1 (Dr. Jeffery Vance), phs000127.v2.p1 (Dr. Orla Hardiman, Dr. Brendan
Loftus, Dr. Daniel G. Bradley, Dr. Alex Evans), phs000344.v1.p1 (Dr. Bryan J. Traynor,
Dr. Pentti J. Tienari), phs000101.v3.p1 (Dr. Bryan J. Traynor), and their primary funding
organizations including National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging, Michael
J. Fox Foundation, International Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium, USAMRAA,
Muscular Dystrophy Association, Science Foundation Ireland, Microsoft Research, the ALS
Association, The Helsinki University Central Hospital, the Finnish Academy, the Finnish
Medical Society Duodecim, Kuopio University. The authors also thank the AMP PD, a
public-private partnership, which is managed by the FNIH and funded by Celgene, GSK, the
Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, Pfizer, and Verily.
Rare variant trend test (RVTT)—To answer whether an enrichment of rare variants in
key P-body genes might confer risk of PD in human population, we applied a pathway-based
association test, namely, the rare variant trend test (RVTT)(Bendapudi et al., 2022) to
case-control PD datasets from AMP-PD. Traditionally, rare variant association tests collapse
variants at the gene level by presence or absence to identify risk genes in a case-control
cohort. However, due to relatively small sample sizes of PD cohorts and the burden
of multiple hypotheses correction, the statistical power of such tests remains low. One
promising way to increase the power of these tests is to assess association at the pathway
level combining variants in multiple genes. But gene-level collapsing tests are not readily
applicable to pathways. They look at the presence or absence of a variant, whereas most
individuals, irrespective of their disease status, are likely to carry at least one variant in a
large pathway.
The advantage of RVTT over traditional burden tests is that instead of considering only the
presence or absence of variants in a pathway, it looks at the frequency of qualifying variants
in the pathway. Under the null hypothesis, the test assumes that there is no linear trend in
the binomial proportions of cases and controls across increasing number of rare variants in
the pathway of interest. The alternative hypothesis indicates the presence of a linear trend.
RVTT leverages Cochran-Armitage statistic (Cochran WG, 1954) to quantify this trend.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 46
Qualifying rare variants are selected using a variable threshold approach (Price et al., 2010).
And the strength of significance is indicated by permutation-based p-values.
Analysis of rare variant burden of P-body genes in PD with RVTT—We analyzed
the whole exome sequencing data from AMP-PD (2020 release) repository maintained
by the NIH to assess the rare variant burden of P-body genes in PD. The two largest
independent cohorts within AMP-PD are PDBP (Parkinson’s Disease Biomarker Program)
and PPMI (Parkinson’s Progressive Marker Initiative), offering an opportunity for cross-
validation within the same dataset. We excluded any individual belonging to the genetic
registry, genetic cohort, SWEDD, and prodromal categories. We included only individuals of
European ancestry in both datasets to remove any potential confounding effect of population
structure. For each of the cohorts, our analysis started with a joint-called variant call format
(VCF) file (assembly version: hg38). We kept only the variants that were bi-allelic, had
a missing genotype rate of <= 10%, had a minimum read depth of >= 10x, and were
from the “PASS” category (i.e., variants that passed standard quality filters defined by the
GATK pipeline). After variant and sample level quality control, PPMI and PDBP datasets
comprised 572 (PD: 391, Control: 181) and 1273 (PD: 823, Control: 450) individuals,
respectively.
We annotated the functional consequences of the variants using SnpEff (v 4.3t) software.
We excluded all non-coding, intronic, and intergenic variants, except the splice region
ones from further analysis. We classified the remaining variants as synonymous, missense,
splice donor, splice acceptor, splice region, stop-gained, stop-lost, start-lost, frameshift, in-
frame insertion, and in-frame deletion variants. We termed the set of stop-gained, stop-lost,
start-lost, frameshift, in-frame insertion, in-frame deletion, and splice region variants as
loss-of-function (LoF) variants. Next, we annotated the vcf file with the gnomAD minor
allele frequencies of variants and the in-silico predictions of deleteriouness of the missense
variants by PolyPhen2 and SIFT from the dbNSFP (v4.0a) database using the SnpSIFT
(v 4.3t) software. All missense variants that were predicted to be either “P” or “D” by
PolyPhen2 or “deleterious” by SIFT were considered as “damaging missense” variants for
our analysis. All “damaging missense” variants and “LoF” variants were considered together
as “damaging” variants.
Since RVTT is a pathway-based test of association, we divided the P-body genes into two
modules(i) CORE module, and (ii) DECAPPING module. The CORE module contains
DDX6, EIF4ENIF1, LSM14A, LSM14B, PATL1, LSM1, LSM2, LSM3, LSM4, LSM5,
LSM6, and LSM7 genes. The DECAPPING module contains PNRC2, DCP2, EDC3, EDC4,
DCP1B, DCP1A, and NBDY genes.
RVTT was applied to test the rare variant burden of these P-body gene modules in both
the PDBP and PPMI datasets. The test selected qualifying rare variants by varying the
MAF cutoff up to 0.05 (Variable-Threshold approach: Price et al., 2010). We quantified
the strength of association using permutation-based p-values (10,000 permutations). Four
variant categories (damaging, damaging missense, neutral missense, and synonymous)
were interrogated in both cohorts. The validity of significant results was confirmed by
demonstrating that there is an accumulation of damaging and damaging missense variants
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 47
in patients versus controls, but no statistically significant difference in proportions of
synonymous and neutral missense variants within the same pathways in cases vs. controls.
Quantification and statistical analysis: Unless otherwise stated, plots were generated
by GraphPad Prism. R packages used in ROSMAP analysis or BriDGE analysis are
indicated in the respective methods section along with the statistical tests. All Python and
related libraries were acquired through Anaconda distribution. Graphs in Supp.Fig.1H and
Supp.Fig.5G were generated in the Jupyter Notebook by using Matplotlib, Seaborn, Pandas
libraries. Unless otherwise noted, statistical tests were done in GraphPad Prism. Unpaired
t-test was used to compare two groups. For multiple t-test comparisons, multiple hypothesis
corrections were performed as indicated in the respective figure legends. For image analysis,
FIJI distribution of ImageJ was used. For counting Edc4 or PLA puncta custom FIJI macros
were written and these macros are available upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank all the members of ARCND community for their critical input on the paper, especially Drs Dennis
Selkoe, Greg Petsko, Ulf Dettmer, Charles Jennings, Vijay Kuchroo and Tracy Young-Pearse. We thank Ulf
Dettmer for the SNCA G51D construct, Lei Liu for PX459 plasmid, Lai Ding at BWH NeuroTechnology Studio
for FIJI macros, Luigi Warren (Cellular Reprogramming) for reprogramming of iPSC. NGS was performed
at the Whitehead Genome Technology core (overseen by Summet Gupta). We thank Dr. Alexander Drew for
helping with quality control of the PPMI and PDBP sub-cohorts of AMP-PD. EH was supported by the HSFP
(LT000717/2015-L), NIH (R21NS112858) and Aligning Science Across Parkinson’s Disease(ASAP-000472). DF
is supported by the Koerner New Scientist Program from the Koerner Family Foundation. We thank Dr. Leon
French for assistance with computational code for enrichment term consolidation for the ROSMAP analysis.
WW and CLM are supported by the Biomarkers Across Neurodegenerative Diseases Grant from the Alzheimer’s
Association, Alzheimer’s Research UK (ARUK), The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research (MJFF),
and the Weston Brain Institute (Weston) (BAND-19-615151). VK is a NYSCF Stem Cell Robertson Investigator
(NYSCF-R-149), a George C. Cotzias Fellow of the American Parkinson’s Disease Association and both awards
supported this work. Additional grants to VK that supported this work include those from Aligning Science Across
Parkinson’s Inititiative (ASAP-000472), Michael J. Fox Foundation, NIH (R21NS112858 and R01NS109209) and
DOD (W81XWH-19-1-0695). The authors also thank the Accelerating Medicines Partnership Parkinson's disease
(AMP PD), a public-private partnership, which is managed by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health
(FNIH) and funded by Celgene, GSK, the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Pfizer, and Verily.
REFERENCES
Andrews S (2010). FastQC: A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data; Available
online at: http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/
Carlson M (2019). GO.db: A set of annotation maps describing the entire Gene Ontology. R package
version 3.8.2.
J.W. 3rd, and Domaszewska T (2016). tmod: an R package for general and multivariate enrichment
analysis. Peerj Prepr 4, e2420v1. 10.7287/peerj.preprints.2420v1.
Adiconis X, Borges-Rivera D, Satija R, DeLuca DS, Busby MA, Berlin AM, Sivachenko A,
Thompson DA, Wysoker A, Fennell T, et al. (2013). Comparative analysis of RNA sequencing
methods for degraded or low-input samples. Nature Methods 10, 623–629. 10.1038/nmeth.2483.
[PubMed: 23685885]
Anders S, Pyl PT, and Huber W (2015). HTSeq—a Python framework to work with high-throughput
sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31, 166–169. 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu638. [PubMed: 25260700]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 48
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight
SS, Eppig JT, et al. (2000). Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Publishing Group 25, 25–29. 10.1038/75556.
Auer PL, Johnsen JM, Johnson AD, Logsdon BA, Lange LA, Nalls MA, Zhang G, Franceschini
N, Fox K, Lange EM, et al. (2012). Imputation of Exome Sequence Variants into Population-
Based Samples and Blood-Cell-Trait-Associated Loci in African Americans: NHLBI GO Exome
Sequencing Project. Am J Hum Genetics 91, 794–808. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.031. [PubMed:
23103231]
Auluck PK, Caraveo G, and Lindquist S (2010). α-Synuclein: membrane interactions and toxicity in
Parkinson’s disease. Annu Rev Cell Dev Bi 26, 211–233. 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.042308.113313.
Bandres-Ciga S, Saez-Atienzar S, Kim JJ, Makarious MB, Faghri F, Diez-Fairen M, Iwaki H, Leonard
H, Botia J, Ryten M, et al. (2020). Large-scale pathway specific polygenic risk and transcriptomic
community network analysis identifies novel functional pathways in Parkinson disease. Acta
Neuropathol 140, 341–358. 10.1007/s00401-020-02181-3. [PubMed: 32601912]
Barbour R, Kling K, Anderson JP, Banducci K, Cole T, Diep L, Fox M, Goldstein JM, Soriano F,
Seubert P, et al. (2008). Red Blood Cells Are the Major Source of Alpha-Synuclein in Blood.
Neurodegener Dis 5, 55–59. 10.1159/000112832. [PubMed: 18182779]
Beatman EL, Massey A, Shives KD, Burrack KS, Chamanian M, Morrison TE, and Beckham JD
(2016). Alpha-Synuclein Expression Restricts RNA Viral Infections in the Brain. J Virol 90, 2767–
2782. 10.1128/jvi.02949-15.
Beckham CJ, and Parker R (2008). P Bodies, Stress Granules, and Viral Life Cycles. Cell Host
Microbe 3, 206–212. 10.1016/j.chom.2008.03.004. [PubMed: 18407064]
Beecham GW, Dickson DW, Scott WK, Martin ER, Schellenberg G, Nuytemans K, Larson EB,
Buxbaum JD, Trojanowski JQ, Deerlin VMV, et al. (2015). PARK10 is a major locus for
sporadic neuropathologically confirmed Parkinson disease. Neurology 84, 972–980. 10.1212/
wnl.0000000000001332. [PubMed: 25663231]
Bendapudi PK, Nazeen S, Ryu J, Söylemez O, Rouaisnel B, Colling M, Pasko B, Robbins A,
Bouzinier M, Tomczak L, et al. (2022). Pathway-based Rare Variant Burden Analysis Identifies a
Role for the Complement System in an Extreme Phenotype of Sepsis with Coagulopathy. Medrxiv
2022.02.24.22271459. 10.1101/2022.02.24.22271459.
Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Kelly JF, Aggarwal NT, Shah RC, and Wilson RS (2006).
Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based
studies. Neurology 66, 1837–1844. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219668.47116.e6. [PubMed: 16801647]
Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, and Wilson RS (2012a). Overview and findings from the
religious orders study. Current Alzheimer Research 9, 628–645. 10.2174/156720512801322573.
[PubMed: 22471860]
Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Buchman AS, Barnes LL, Boyle PA, and Wilson RS (2012b). Overview
and findings from the rush Memory and Aging Project. Current Alzheimer Research 9, 646–663.
10.2174/156720512801322663. [PubMed: 22471867]
Bennett DA, Buchman AS, Boyle PA, Barnes LL, Wilson RS, and Schneider JA (2018). Religious
Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 64, S161–
S189. 10.3233/jad-179939.
Bozic M, Caus M, Rodrigues-Diez RR, Pedraza N, Ruiz-Ortega M, Garí E, Gallel P, Panadés
MJ, Martinez A, Fernández E, et al. (2020). Protective role of renal proximal tubular alpha-
synuclein in the pathogenesis of kidney fibrosis. Nature Communications 11, 1–16. 10.1038/
s41467-020-15732-9.
Brück D, Wenning GK, Stefanova N, and Fellner L (2016). Glia and alpha-synuclein
in neurodegeneration: A complex interaction. Neurobiol Dis 85, 262–274. 10.1016/
j.nbd.2015.03.003. [PubMed: 25766679]
Buchman AS, Shulman JM, Nag S, Leurgans SE, Arnold SE, Morris MC, Schneider JA, and Bennett
DA (2012). Nigral pathology and parkinsonian signs in elders without Parkinson disease. Annals
of Neurology 71, 258–266. 10.1002/ana.22588. [PubMed: 22367997]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 49
Burré J, Sharma M, and Südhof TC (2015). Definition of a molecular pathway mediating α-synuclein
neurotoxicity. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience
35, 5221–5232. 10.1523/jneurosci.4650-14.2015. [PubMed: 25834048]
Burré J, Sharma M, and Südhof TC (2018). Cell Biology and Pathophysiology of α-Synuclein. Csh
Perspect Med 8, a024091–29. 10.1101/cshperspect.a024091.
Byers B, Cord B, Nguyen HN, Schüle B, Fenno L, Lee PC, Deisseroth K, Langston JW, Pera
RR, and Palmer TD (2011). SNCA Triplication Parkinson’s Patient’s iPSC-derived DA Neurons
Accumulate α-Synuclein and Are Susceptible to Oxidative Stress. PLoS ONE 6, e26159–13.
10.1371/journal.pone.0026159. [PubMed: 22110584]
Cabin DE, Shimazu K, Murphy D, Cole NB, Gottschalk W, McIlwain KL, Orrison B, Chen A,
Ellis CE, Paylor R, et al. (2002). Synaptic vesicle depletion correlates with attenuated synaptic
responses to prolonged repetitive stimulation in mice lacking alpha-synuclein. 22, 8797–8807.
10.1523/jneurosci.22-20-08797.2002.
Chang C-T, Bercovich N, Loh B, Jonas S, and Izaurralde E (2014). The activation of the decapping
enzyme DCP2 by DCP1 occurs on the EDC4 scaffold and involves a conserved loop in DCP1.
Nucleic Acids Res 42, 5217–5233. 10.1093/nar/gku129. [PubMed: 24510189]
Chang D, Nalls MA, Hallgrímsdóttir IB, Hunkapiller J, Brug M. van der, Cai F, Kerchner GA,
Ayalon G, Bingol B, Sheng M, et al. (2017). A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies
identifies 17 new Parkinson’s disease risk loci. Nat Genet 7, 1–10. 10.1038/ng.3955.
Chartier-Harlin M-C, Dachsel JC, Vilariño-Güell C, Lincoln SJ, Leprêtre F, Hulihan MM, Kachergus
J, Milnerwood AJ, Tapia L, Song M-S, et al. (2011). Translation initiator EIF4G1 mutations
in familial Parkinson disease. Am J Hum Genetics 89, 398–406. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.08.009.
[PubMed: 21907011]
Chiò A, Schymick JC, Restagno G, Scholz SW, Lombardo F, Lai S-L, Mora G, Fung H-C, Britton
A, Arepalli S, et al. (2009). A two-stage genome-wide association study of sporadic amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Human Molecular Genetics 18, 1524–1532. 10.1093/hmg/ddp059. [PubMed:
19193627]
Chung CY, Khurana V, Auluck PK, Tardiff DF, Mazzulli JR, Soldner F, Baru V, Lou Y, Freyzon Y,
Cho S, et al. (2013). Identification and rescue of α-synuclein toxicity in Parkinson patient-derived
neurons. Science 342, 983–987. 10.1126/science.1245296. [PubMed: 24158904]
Chung CY, Khurana V, Yi S, Sahni N, Loh KH, Auluck PK, Baru V, Udeshi ND, Freyzon Y, Carr
SA, et al. (2017). In Situ Peroxidase Labeling and Mass-Spectrometry Connects Alpha-Synuclein
Directly to Endocytic Trafficking and mRNA Metabolism in Neurons. Cell Syst 4, 242–250.e4.
10.1016/j.cels.2017.01.002. [PubMed: 28131823]
Corbet GA, and Parker R (2020). RNP Granule Formation: Lessons from P-Bodies and Stress
Granules. Cold Spring Harb Sym 84, 040329. 10.1101/sqb.2019.84.040329.
Cronin S, Berger S, Ding J, Schymick JC, Washecka N, Hernandez DG, Greenway MJ, Bradley DG,
Traynor BJ, and Hardiman O (2008). A genome-wide association study of sporadic ALS in a
homogenous Irish population. Hum Mol Genet 17, 768–774. 10.1093/hmg/ddm361. [PubMed:
18057069]
Das T, and Eliezer D (2019). Membrane interactions of intrinsically disordered proteins_
The example of alpha-synuclein. BBA - Proteins and Proteomics 1867, 879–889. 10.1016/
j.bbapap.2019.05.001. [PubMed: 31096049]
Decker CJ, and Parker R (2012). P-Bodies and Stress Granules: Possible Roles in the Control
of Translation and mRNA Degradation. Csh Perspect Biol 4, a012286–a012286. 10.1101/
cshperspect.a012286.
Dettmer U (2018). Rationally Designed Variants of α-Synuclein Illuminate Its in vivo
Structural Properties in Health and Disease. Frontiers in Neuroscience 12, 239–14. 10.3389/
fnins.2018.00623. [PubMed: 29692707]
Dettmer U, Selkoe D, and Bartels T (2016). New insights into cellular α-synuclein homeostasis
in health and disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 36, 15–22. 10.1016/j.conb.2015.07.007. [PubMed:
26282834]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 50
Dhungel N, Eleuteri S, Li L, Kramer NJ, Chartron JW, Spencer B, Kosberg K, Fields JA, Stafa K,
Adame A, et al. (2015). Parkinson’s disease genes VPS35 and EIF4G1 interact genetically and
converge on α-synuclein. Neuron 85, 76–87. 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.11.027. [PubMed: 25533483]
Dobin A, and Gingeras TR (2015). Mapping RNA-seq Reads with STAR. Curr Protoc Bioinform 51,
11.14.1–11.14.19. 10.1002/0471250953.bi1114s51.
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, and Gingeras
TR (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 29, 15–
21. 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635.
Eulalio A, Behm-Ansmant I, Schweizer D, and Izaurralde E (2007). P-body formation is a
consequence, not the cause, of RNA-mediated gene silencing. Mol Cell Biol 27, 3970–3981.
10.1128/mcb.00128-07. [PubMed: 17403906]
Ewels P, Magnusson M, Lundin S, and Käller M (2016). MultiQC: summarize analysis results
for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics 32, 3047–3048. 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btw354. [PubMed: 27312411]
Fang G, Wang W, Paunic V, Heydari H, Costanzo M, Liu X, Liu X, VanderSluis B, Oately B,
Steinbach M, et al. (2019). Discovering genetic interactions bridging pathways in genome-wide
association studies. Nature Communications 10, 1–18. 10.1038/s41467-019-12131-7.
Feany MB, and Bender WW (2000). A Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. Nature 404, 394–
398. 10.1038/35006074. [PubMed: 10746727]
Felsky D, Sariya S, Santa-Maria I, French L, Schneider JA, Bennett DA, Mayeux R, Jager PLD,
and Tosto G (2020). The Caribbean-Hispanic Alzheimer’s Brain Transcriptome Reveals Ancestry-
Specific Disease Mechanisms. Biorxiv 2020.05.28.122234. 10.1101/2020.05.28.122234.
Foffani G, and Obeso JA (2018). A Cortical Pathogenic Theory of Parkinson’s Disease. Neuron 99,
1116–1128. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.028. [PubMed: 30236282]
Fromm SA, Truffault V, Kamenz J, Braun JE, Hoffmann NA, Izaurralde E, and Sprangers R (2011).
The structural basis of Edc3- and Scd6-mediated activation of the Dcp1:Dcp2 mRNA decapping
complex. The EMBO Journal 31, 279–290. 10.1038/emboj.2011.408. [PubMed: 22085934]
Fung H-C, Scholz S, Matarin M, Simón-Sánchez J, Hernandez D, Britton A, Gibbs JR, Langefeld
C, Stiegert ML, Schymick J, et al. (2006). Genome-wide genotyping in Parkinson’s disease
and neurologically normal controls: first stage analysis and public release of data. The Lancet
Neurology 5, 911–916. 10.1016/s1474-4422(06)70578-6. [PubMed: 17052657]
Fusco G, Gopinath T, Vostrikov V, Vendruscolo M, Simone AD, Dobson CM, and Veglia G (2014).
Direct observation of the three regions in &alpha;-synuclein that determine its membrane-bound
behaviour. Nature Communications 5, 1–8. 10.1038/ncomms4827.
Fusco G, Sanz-Hernandez M, and Simone AD (2018). Order and disorder in the physiological
membrane binding of α-synuclein. Curr Opin Struc Biol 48, 49–57. 10.1016/j.sbi.2017.09.004.
Fushimi K, Long C, Jayaram N, Chen X, Li L, and Wu JY (2011). Expression of human FUS/TLS
in yeast leads to protein aggregation and cytotoxicity, recapitulating key features of FUS
proteinopathy. Protein Cell 2, 141–149. 10.1007/s13238-011-1014-5. [PubMed: 21327870]
Gaete-Argel A, Márquez CL, Barriga GP, Soto-Rifo R, and Valiente-Echeverría F (2019). Strategies
for Success. Viral Infections and Membraneless Organelles. Frontiers in Cellular and Infection
Microbiology 9, 369–28. 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00336.
Goedert M, Spillantini M-G, Tredici KD, and Braak H (2012). 100 years of Lewy pathology. Nat Rev
Neurol 9, 1–12. 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.242. [PubMed: 23229406]
Greten-Harrison B, Polydoro M, Morimoto-Tomita M, Diao L, Williams AM, Nie EH, Makani
S, Tian N, Castillo PE, Buchman VL, et al. (2010). αβγ-Synuclein triple knockout mice
reveal age-dependent neuronal dysfunction. Proc National Acad Sci 107, 19573–19578. 10.1073/
pnas.1005005107.
Gudkova D, Panasyuk G, Nemazanyy I, Zhyvoloup A, Monteil P, Filonenko V, and Gout I (2012).
EDC4 interacts with and regulates the dephospho-CoA kinase activity of CoA synthase. FEBS
Letters 586, 3590–3595. 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.08.033. [PubMed: 22982864]
Halliday GM, and Stevens CH (2011). Glia: Initiators and progressors of pathology in Parkinson’s
disease. Movement Disord 26, 6–17. 10.1002/mds.23455. [PubMed: 21322014]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 51
Hamza TH, Zabetian CP, Tenesa A, Laederach A, Montimurro J, Yearout D, Kay DM, Doheny KF,
Paschall J, Pugh E, et al. (2010). Common genetic variation in the HLA region is associated with
late-onset sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Nature Genetics 42, 781–785. 10.1038/ng.642. [PubMed:
20711177]
Hayden E, Chen S, Chumley A, Xia C, Zhong Q, and Ju S (2020). A Genetic Screen for Human Genes
Suppressing FUS Induced Toxicity in Yeast. G3 Genes Genomes Genetics 10, g3.401164.2020.
10.1534/g3.120.401164
Hein MY, Hubner NC, Poser I, Cox J, Nagaraj N, Toyoda Y, Gak IA, Weisswange I, Mansfeld J,
Buchholz F, et al. (2015). A Human Interactome in Three Quantitative Dimensions Organized
by Stoichiometries and Abundances. Cell 163, 712–723. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.053. [PubMed:
26496610]
Hernández G, Ramírez MJ, Minguillón J, Quiles P, Garibay G.R. de, Aza-Carmona M, Bogliolo
M, Pujol R, Prados-Carvajal R, Fernández J, et al. (2018). Decapping protein EDC4
regulates DNA repair and phenocopies BRCA1. Nature Communications 9, 967–11. 10.1038/
s41467-018-03433-3.
Hontz RD, Niederer RO, Johnson JM, and Smith JS (2009). Genetic identification of factors that
modulate ribosomal DNA transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 182, 105–119.
10.1534/genetics.108.100313. [PubMed: 19270272]
Horvathova I, Voigt F, Kotrys AV, Zhan Y, Artus-Revel CG, Eglinger J, Stadler MB, Giorgetti L, and
Chao JA (2017). The Dynamics of mRNA Turnover Revealed by Single-Molecule Imaging in
Single Cells. Mol Cell 68, 615–624.e10. 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.030. [PubMed: 29056324]
Hubstenberger A, Courel M, Bénard M, Souquere S, Ernoult-Lange M, Chouaib R, Yi Z, Morlot J-B,
Munier A, Fradet M, et al. (2017). P-Body Purification Reveals the Condensation of Repressed
mRNA Regulons. Mol Cell 68, 1–30. 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.003. [PubMed: 28985500]
Hung V, Udeshi ND, Lam SS, Loh KH, Cox KJ, Pedram K, Carr SA, and Ting AY (2016). Spatially
resolved proteomic mapping in living cells with the engineered peroxidase APEX2. Nature
Protocols 11, 456–475. 10.1038/nprot.2016.018. [PubMed: 26866790]
Hunn BHM, Cragg SJ, Bolam JP, Spillantini M-G, and Wade-Martins R (2016). Impaired
intracellular trafficking defines early Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci 38, 1–11. 10.1016/
j.tins.2014.12.009.
Hurtig HI, Trojanowski JQ, Galvin J, Ewbank D, Schmidt ML, Lee VM-Y, Clark CM, Glosser
G, Stern MB, Gollomp SM, et al. (2000). Alpha-synuclein cortical Lewy bodies correlate with
dementia in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 54, 1916–1921. 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1916. [PubMed:
10822429]
(IPDGC), I.P.D.G.C., and (WTCCC2), W.T.C.C.C. 2 (2011). A Two-Stage Meta-Analysis
Identifies Several New Loci for Parkinson’s Disease. Plos Genet 7, e1002142. 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1002142. [PubMed: 21738488]
Ivanov P, and Anderson P (2013). Post-transcriptional regulatory networks in immunity.
Immunological Reviews 253, 253–272. 10.1111/imr.12051. [PubMed: 23550651]
Jager PLD, Yang H-S, and Bennett DA (2018). Deconstructing and targeting the genomic architecture
of human neurodegeneration. Nat Neurosci 21, 1–8. 10.1038/s41593-018-0240-z.
Jarosz DF, and Khurana V (2017). Specification of Physiologic and Disease States by Distinct
Proteins and Protein Conformations. Cell 171, 1001–1014. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.047. [PubMed:
29149602]
Jonas S, and Izaurralde E (2013). The role of disordered protein regions in the assembly of decapping
complexes and RNP granules. Gene Dev 27, 2628–2641. 10.1101/gad.227843.113. [PubMed:
24352420]
Ju S, Tardiff DF, Han H, Divya K, Zhong Q, Maquat LE, Bosco DA, Hayward LJ, Brown RH,
Lindquist S, et al. (2011). A Yeast Model of FUS/TLS-Dependent Cytotoxicity. Plos Biol 9,
e1001052. 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001052. [PubMed: 21541368]
Kedersha N, and Anderson P (2007). Mammalian Stress Granules and Processing Bodies. Methods
Enzymol 431, 61–81. 10.1016/s0076-6879(07)31005-7. [PubMed: 17923231]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 52
Keeney M, Hoffman E, Greenamyre J, and Maio RD (2021). Measurement of LRRK2 Kinase Activity
by Proximity Ligation Assay. Bio-Protocol 11, e4140. 10.21769/bioprotoc.4140. [PubMed:
34604446]
Keller MF, Saad M, Brás J, Bettella F, Nicolaou N, Simón-Sánchez J, Mittag F, Büchel F, Sharma
M, Gibbs JR, et al. (2012). Using genome-wide complex trait analysis to quantify “missing
heritability” in Parkinson’s disease. Hum Mol Genet 21, 4996–5009. 10.1093/hmg/dds335.
[PubMed: 22892372]
Kennedy SA, Jarboui M-A, Srihari S, Raso C, Bryan K, Dernayka L, Charitou T, Bernal-Llinares
M, Herrera-Montavez C, Krstic A, et al. (2020). Extensive rewiring of the EGFR network in
colorectal cancer cells expressing transforming levels of KRASG13D. Nat Commun 11, 499.
10.1038/s41467-019-14224-9. [PubMed: 31980649]
Keryer-Bibens C, Barreau C, and Osborne HB (2008). Tethering of proteins to RNAs by bacteriophage
proteins. Biol Cell 100, 125–138. 10.1042/bc20070067. [PubMed: 18199049]
Khurana V, Peng J, Chung CY, Auluck PK, Fanning S, Tardiff DF, Bartels T, Koeva M, Eichhorn
SW, Benyamini H, et al. (2017). Genome-Scale Networks Link Neurodegenerative Disease
Genes to α-Synuclein through Specific Molecular Pathways. Cell Syst 4, 157–170.e14. 10.1016/
j.cels.2016.12.011. [PubMed: 28131822]
Kontopoulos E, Parvin JD, and Feany MB (2006). α-synuclein acts in the nucleus to inhibit histone
acetylation and promote neurotoxicity. Human Molecular Genetics 15, 3012–3023. 10.1093/hmg/
ddl243. [PubMed: 16959795]
Laaksovirta H, Peuralinna T, Schymick JC, Scholz SW, Lai S-L, Myllykangas L, Sulkava R,
Jansson L, Hernandez DG, Gibbs JR, et al. (2010). Chromosome 9p21 in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis in Finland: a genome-wide association study. Lancet Neurology 9, 978–985. 10.1016/
s1474-4422(10)70184-8. [PubMed: 20801718]
Lam I, Hallacli E, and Khurana V (2020). Proteome-Scale Mapping of Perturbed Proteostasis in Living
Cells. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 12, a034124–26. 10.1101/cshperspect.a034124.
[PubMed: 30910772]
Law CW, Chen Y, Shi W, and Smyth GK (2014). voom: Precision weights unlock linear model
analysis tools for RNA-seq read counts. Genome Biology 15, R29–17. 10.1186/gb-2014-15-2-r29.
[PubMed: 24485249]
Lee BR, and Kamitani T (2011). Improved Immunodetection of Endogenous α-Synuclein. Plos One 6,
e23939–8. 10.1371/journal.pone.0023939. [PubMed: 21886844]
Levin JZ, Yassour M, Adiconis X, Nusbaum C, Thompson DA, Friedman N, Gnirke A, and Regev A
(2010). Comprehensive comparative analysis of strand-specific RNA sequencing methods. Nature
Methods 7, 709–715. 10.1038/nmeth.1491. [PubMed: 20711195]
Li B, and Dewey CN (2011). RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with
or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323–16. 10.1186/1471-2105-12-323.
[PubMed: 21816040]
Locascio JJ, Eberly S, Liao Z, Liu G, Hoesing AN, Duong K, Trisini-Lipsanopoulos A, Dhima K,
Hung AY, Flaherty AW, et al. (2015). Association between α-synuclein blood transcripts and
early, neuroimaging-supported Parkinson’s disease. Brain 138, 2659–2671. 10.1093/brain/awv202.
[PubMed: 26220939]
Love MI, Huber W, and Anders S (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion
for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15, 550. 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8. [PubMed:
25516281]
Maio RD, Barrett PJ, Hoffman EK, Barrett CW, Zharikov A, Borah A, Hu X, McCoy J, Chu
CT, Burton EA, et al. (2016). α-Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein
import in Parkinson’s disease. Science Translational Medicine 8, 342ra78–342ra78. 10.1126/
scitranslmed.aaf3634.
Maraganore DM, Andrade M. de, Lesnick TG, Strain KJ, Farrer MJ, Rocca WA, Pant PVK, Frazer
KA, Cox DR, and Ballinger DG (2005). High-Resolution Whole-Genome Association Study of
Parkinson Disease. Am J Hum Genetics 77, 685–693. 10.1086/496902. [PubMed: 16252231]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 53
Marras C, Beck JC, Bower JH, Roberts E, Ritz B, Ross GW, Abbott RD, Savica R, Eeden SKVD,
Willis AW, et al. (2018). Prevalence of Parkinson’s disease across North America. Npj Parkinson’s
Disease 4, 1–7. 10.1038/s41531-018-0058-0.
Massey AR, and Beckham JD (2016). Alpha-Synuclein, a Novel Viral Restriction Factor Hiding in
Plain Sight. DNA and Cell Biology 35, 643–645. 10.1089/dna.2016.3488. [PubMed: 27631132]
Mazzulli JR, Zunke F, Isacson O, Studer L, and Krainc D (2016). α-Synuclein-induced lysosomal
dysfunction occurs through disruptions in protein trafficking in human midbrain synucleinopathy
models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113,
1931–1936. 10.1073/pnas.1520335113. [PubMed: 26839413]
McFarland MA, Ellis CE, Markey SP, and Nussbaum RL (2008). Proteomics Analysis Identifies
Phosphorylation-dependent α-Synuclein Protein Interactions. Mol Cell Proteomics 7, 2123–2137.
10.1074/mcp.m800116-mcp200. [PubMed: 18614564]
McKeith IG (2006). Consensus guidelines for the clinical and pathologic diagnosis of dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB): report of the Consortium on DLB International Workshop, pp. 417–423.
Mostafavi S, Gaiteri C, Sullivan SE, White CC, Tasaki S, Xu J, Taga M, Klein H-U, Patrick E,
Komashko V, et al. (2018). A molecular network of the aging human brain provides insights into
the pathology and cognitive decline of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 21, 811–819. 10.1038/
s41593-018-0154-9. [PubMed: 29802388]
Nalls MA, Pankratz N, Lill CM, Do CB, Hernandez DG, Saad M, DeStefano AL, Kara E, Brás J,
Sharma M, et al. (2014). Large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identifies
six new risk loci for Parkinson’s disease. Nat Genet 46, 989–993. 10.1038/ng.3043. [PubMed:
25064009]
Nalls MA, Bras J, Hernandez DG, Keller MF, Majounie E, Renton AE, Saad M, Jansen I,
Guerreiro R, Lubbe S, et al. (2015). NeuroX, a fast and efficient genotyping platform for
investigation of neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiol Aging 36, 1605.e7–1605.e12. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2014.07.028.
Newby GA, Kiriakov S, Hallacli E, Kayatekin C, Tsvetkov P, Mancuso CP, Bonner JM, Hesse WR,
Chakrabortee S, Manogaran AL, et al. (2017). A Genetic Tool to Track Protein Aggregates
and Control Prion Inheritance. Cell 171, 966–968.e18. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.041. [PubMed:
29056345]
Nguyen M, Wong YC, Ysselstein D, Severino A, and Krainc D (2019). Synaptic, Mitochondrial, and
Lysosomal Dysfunction in Parkinson’s Disease. Trends in Neurosciences 42, 140–149. 10.1016/
j.tins.2018.11.001. [PubMed: 30509690]
Nichols WC, Pankratz N, Hernandez D, Paisán-Ruíz C, Jain S, Halter CA, Michaels VE, Reed T,
Rudolph A, Shults CW, et al. (2005). Genetic screening for a single common LRRK2 mutation in
familial Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 365, 410–412. 10.1016/s0140-6736(05)17828-3. [PubMed:
15680455]
Olsen AL, and Feany MB (2019). Glial α-synuclein promotes neurodegeneration characterized by
a distinct transcriptional program in vivo. Glia 67, 1933–1957. 10.1002/glia.23671. [PubMed:
31267577]
Paillusson S, Gomez-Suaga P, Stoica R, Little D, Gissen P, Devine MJ, Noble W, Hanger DP, and
Miller CCJ (2017). α-Synuclein binds to the ER–mitochondria tethering protein VAPB to disrupt
Ca2+ homeostasis and mitochondrial ATP production. Acta Neuropathol 134, 129–149. 10.1007/
s00401-017-1704-z. [PubMed: 28337542]
Paull D, Sevilla A, Zhou H, Hahn AK, Kim H, Napolitano C, Tsankov A, Shang L, Krumholz
K, Jagadeesan P, et al. (2015). Automated, high-throughput derivation, characterization and
differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells. Nat Methods 12, 885–892. 10.1038/nmeth.3507.
[PubMed: 26237226]
Pei Y, and Maitta RW (2019). Alpha synuclein in hematopoiesis and immunity. Heliyon 5, e02590.
10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02590. [PubMed: 31692680]
Perrin RJ, Woods WS, Clayton DF, and George JM (2000). Interaction of human alpha-Synuclein
and Parkinson’s disease variants with phospholipids. Structural analysis using site-directed
mutagenesis. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 275, 34393–34398. 10.1074/jbc.m004851200.
[PubMed: 10952980]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 54
Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E, Ide SE, Dehejia A, Dutra A, Pike B, Root H,
Rubenstein J, Boyer R, et al. (1997). Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identified in families
with Parkinson’s disease. Science 276, 2045–2047. 10.1126/science.276.5321.2045. [PubMed:
9197268]
Price AL, Kryukov GV, Bakker P.I.W. de, Purcell SM, Staples J, Wei L-J, and Sunyaev SR (2010).
Pooled Association Tests for Rare Variants in Exon-Resequencing Studies. Am J Hum Genetics
86, 832–838. 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.005. [PubMed: 20471002]
Ran FA, Hsu PD, Wright J, Agarwala V, Scott DA, and Zhang F (2013). Genome engineering using the
CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat Protoc 8, 2281–2308. 10.1038/nprot.2013.143. [PubMed: 24157548]
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, and Smyth GK (2015). limma powers
differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids
Research 43, e47–e47. 10.1093/nar/gkv007. [PubMed: 25605792]
Ryan SD, Dolatabadi N, Chan SF, Zhang X, Akhtar MW, Parker J, Soldner F, Sunico CR, Nagar S,
Talantova M, et al. (2013). Isogenic Human iPSC Parkinson’s Model Shows Nitrosative Stress-
Induced Dysfunction in MEF2-PGC1&alpha; Transcription. Cell 155, 1351–1364. 10.1016/
j.cell.2013.11.009. [PubMed: 24290359]
Sarkar S, Rokad D, Malovic E, Luo J, Harischandra DS, Jin H, Anantharam V, Huang X, Lewis
M, Kanthasamy A, et al. (2019). Manganese activates NLRP3 inflammasome signaling and
propagates exosomal release of ASC in microglial cells. Science Signaling 12, eaat9900.
10.1126/scisignal.aat9900. [PubMed: 30622196]
Schaser AJ, Osterberg VR, Dent SE, Stackhouse TL, Wakeham CM, Boutros SW, Weston LJ,
Owen N, Weissman TA, Luna E, et al. (2019). Alpha-synuclein is a DNA binding protein that
modulates DNA repair with implications for Lewy body disorders. Scientific Reports 9, 1–19.
10.1038/s41598-019-47227-z. [PubMed: 30626917]
Scheiblich H, Dansokho C, Mercan D, Schmidt SV, Bousset L, Wischhof L, Eikens F, Odainic A,
Spitzer J, Griep A, et al. (2021). Microglia jointly degrade fibrillar alpha-synuclein cargo by
distribution through tunneling nanotubes. Cell 10.1016/j.cell.2021.09.007.
Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Yu L, Boyle PA, Leurgans SE, and Bennett DA (2012). Cognitive
impairment, decline and fluctuations in older community-dwelling subjects with Lewy bodies.
Brain 135, 3005–3014. 10.1093/brain/aws234. [PubMed: 23065790]
She M, Decker CJ, Svergun DI, Round A, Chen N, Muhlrad D, Parker R, and Song H (2008).
Structural Basis of Dcp2 Recognition and Activation by Dcp1. Molecular Cell 29, 337–349.
10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.002. [PubMed: 18280239]
Shulman JM, Jager PLD, and Feany MB (2011). Parkinson’s disease: genetics and pathogenesis.
Pathology Mech Dis 6, 193–222. 10.1146/annurev-pathol-011110-130242.
Siitonen A, Nalls MA, Hernández D, Gibbs JR, Ding J, Ylikotila P, Edsall C, Singleton A,
and Majamaa K (2017). Genetics of early-onset Parkinson’s disease in Finland: exome
sequencing and genome-wide association study. Neurobiol Aging 53, 195.e7–195.e10. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2017.01.019.
Simon-Sanchez J, Scholz S, Fung H-C, Matarin M, Hernandez D, Gibbs JR, Britton A, Vrieze F.W. de,
Peckham E, Gwinn-Hardy K, et al. (2007). Genome-wide SNP assay reveals structural genomic
variation, extended homozygosity and cell-line induced alterations in normal individuals. Hum
Mol Genet 16, 1–14. 10.1093/hmg/ddl436. [PubMed: 17116639]
Singleton AB, Farrer M, Johnson J, Singleton A, Hague S, Kachergus J, Hulihan M, Peuralinna
T, Dutra A, Nussbaum R, et al. (2003). alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s
disease. Science 302, 841. 10.1126/science.1090278. [PubMed: 14593171]
Snead D, and Eliezer D (2019). Intrinsically disordered proteins in synaptic vesicle trafficking
and release. The Journal of Biological Chemistry 294, 3325–3342. 10.1074/jbc.rev118.006493.
[PubMed: 30700558]
Soldner F, Stelzer Y, Shivalila CS, Abraham BJ, Latourelle JC, Barrasa MI, Goldmann J, Myers
RH, Young RA, and Jaenisch R (2016). Parkinson-associated risk variant in distal enhancer of α-
synuclein modulates target gene expression. Nature 533, 95–99. 10.1038/nature17939. [PubMed:
27096366]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 55
Spillantini MG, Schmidt ML, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Jakes R, and Goedert M (1997). Alpha-
synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 388, 839–840. 10.1038/42166. [PubMed: 9278044]
Stefano BD, Luo E-C, Haggerty C, Aigner S, Charlton J, Brumbaugh J, Ji F, Jiménez IR, Clowers KJ,
Huebner AJ, et al. (2019). The RNA Helicase DDX6 Controls Cellular Plasticity by Modulating
P-Body Homeostasis. 1–31. 10.1016/j.stem.2019.08.018.
Supek F, Bošnjak M, Škunca N, and Šmuc T (2011). REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long
lists of gene ontology terms. PLoS ONE 6, e21800. 10.1371/journal.pone.0021800. [PubMed:
21789182]
Trapnell C, Roberts A, Goff L, Pertea G, Kim D, Kelley DR, Pimentel H, Salzberg SL, Rinn
JL, and Pachter L (2012). Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq
experiments with TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat Protoc 7, 562–578. 10.1038/nprot.2012.016.
[PubMed: 22383036]
Uhlen M, Fagerberg L, Hallstrom BM, Lindskog C, Oksvold P, Mardinoglu A, Sivertsson A, Kampf
C, Sjostedt E, Asplund A, et al. (2015). Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science (New
York, NY) 347, 1260419–1260419. 10.1126/science.1260419.
Volpicelli-Daley LA, Luk KC, and Lee VM-Y (2014). Addition of exogenous α-synuclein preformed
fibrils to primary neuronal cultures to seed recruitment of endogenous α-synuclein to Lewy body
and Lewy neurite–like aggregates. Nat Protoc 9, 2135–2146. 10.1038/nprot.2014.143. [PubMed:
25122523]
Wang W, Xu ZZ, Costanzo M, Boone C, Lange CA, and Myers CL (2017). Pathway-based
discovery of genetic interactions in breast cancer. PLoS Genetics 13, e1006973–29. 10.1371/
journal.pgen.1006973. [PubMed: 28957314]
Wilhelm BG, Mandad S, Truckenbrodt S, Kröhnert K, Schäfer C, Rammner B, Koo SJ, Claßen GA,
Krauss M, Haucke V, et al. (2014). Composition of isolated synaptic boutons reveals the amounts
of vesicle trafficking proteins. Science 344, 1023–1028. 10.1126/science.1252884. [PubMed:
24876496]
Winstall E, Sadowski M, Kühn U, Wahle E, and Sachs AB (2000). The Saccharomyces
cerevisiaeRNA-binding Protein Rbp29 Functions in Cytoplasmic mRNA Metabolism. The
Journal of Biological Chemistry 275, 21817–21826. 10.1074/jbc.m002412200. [PubMed:
10764794]
Zhang Y, Pak C, Han Y, Ahlenius H, Zhang Z, Chanda S, Marro S, Patzke C, Acuna C, Covy J, et
al. (2013). Rapid single-step induction of functional neurons from human pluripotent stem cells.
Neuron 78, 785–798. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.029. [PubMed: 23764284]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 56
Highlights
• αSynuclein (αS) toxicity linked to P-bodies through yeast, fly and human
genetics
• Physiologic binding of αS N-terminus to either membranes or P-body
decapping module
• Pathologic αSyn accumulation disrupts the decapping module in PD neurons
and brain
• Pathologic αSyn disrupts mRNA stability in PD iPSC neurons
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 57
Figure 1. Processing body genes are modifiers of αS mediated toxicity in yeast and Drosophila.
(A) Logic of RBP perturbation screen. The RBP-yTRAP platform (left) is crossed to ND
protein expressing yeast (right). Upon induction of ND protein, the mNeonGreen output
signal was quantitated by flow cytometry. ZnFs for ZEM module and yTRAP module
are different. (AD: Activator domain, ZnF: ZincFinger, RBP: RNA-binding protein, ND:
neurodegeneration)
(B) Perturbation screen results. Y axis: Fluorescence linear fold change (induction of ND
protein versus no induction), X-axis: RBP sensors (3 biological replicate screens; mean, sd).
Four of the most perturbed proteins upon αS induction are marked and the inlet shows the
graph for three of these proteins (mean, sd, t-test, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001).
(C, D, E) αS toxicity modifier mini-screens guided by Sgn1 yTRAP signal. 39 genes for
overexpression/deletion and 24 genes for yTRAP screen. (C, D) Representative plate growth
assays of αS toxicity modifiers. (Dotted line indicate a cut within the same plate). (E)
yTRAP assay showing αS specific significant perturbation signals (in comparison to Fus)
for 11 genes. (n=4 biological replicates, mean, sd, p<0.0005 for all 11 genes, multiple
comparison corrected among 24 tested genes). For all the 24 genes tested, see Supp.Fig1H.
(F) Sgn1 guided mini-screens for αS toxicity modifiers converge on complexes within
P-body granules. Miniscreens are color-coded.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 58
(G-H) Locomotor based forward genetic screen in flies.(G) RT-qPCR validation of XRN1
knockdown in brains of two RNAi stocks (n=6, mean± sem, two-tailed t-test). (H)
Locomotor activity measurements (mean± sd) of flies. Data were analyzed using one-way
ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc analysis (n=6).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 59
Figure 2. αS physically interacts with Processing-Body components, specifically the decapping
module.
(A) SILAC mass spectrometry (MS) to identify αS-GFP associated proteins.
(B) Expression levels of αS-GFP and GFP-alone control in whole cell lysates (The mid lane
is cut).
(C) Decapping module proteins of P-bodies were enriched in αS-GFP pulldowns. Right
panel: 29 enriched proteins (αS-GFP log
2
FC>1 over GFP alone) are re-drawn with adjusted
p-values on x-axis (BH correction, p< 0.05).
(D) In-vivo biotin tagging of αS by BirA and isogenic HEK293 cell line generation by FRT
integration.
(E) Endogenous P-body components are enriched upon biotinylated αS pulldown. G3BP1
and EIF4E are SG markers. GAPDH and VCP are abundant control proteins.
(F-G) Silver staining of biotinylated αS-Avi pulldowns along with control cell lines showing
purity and specificity. The 150 kDA band is Edc4 as revealed by mass-spectrometry. (G)
Stable knock-out of Edc4 in stable lines expressing in situ biotinylated αSyn (mock is a
non-targeting guide)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 60
(H)Input normalized enrichment of N-terminally nanoluc tagged P-body proteins after
biotinylated αSyn pulldown. (n=3, mean,sem). DTL gene is a non P-body control gene.
(I) αSyn and Edc4 interact In vitro in baculovirus mediated Sf9 insect cell expression
systems.
(J) Biotinylated αS pulldowns in stable DDX6 knock-out background. Up: IF of P-body
markers, Ddx6 and Edc4. Below: αS-Avi pulldown with streptavidin beads (mock;non-
targeting gRNA). 2 separate gRNAs were used for stable KO of Ddx6.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 61
Figure 3. The N-terminus of αS dichotomously interacts either with decapping-module proteins
or with membranes.
All experiments were performed by transient transfection of a single plasmid containing
αS-Avi mutant co-expressing BirA ligase in HEK293 cells. αS pulldown was performed by
Streptavidin beads and probed for P-body proteins.
(A) A schematic of αS on a bilayer membrane with its acidic C-terminus projecting away
from the membrane.
(B) 10 aa deletion-scan of αS-Avi in HEK293 cells in lipid binding domain(1-100 aa). Note
the absence of P-body interactions in Δ11-20 aa mutant.
(C) The first 20 aa residues of αS are essential for decapping module interactions (quantified
interactions, n=3, mean,sem).
(D) Logic of membrane-averse or membrane-avid stratification of αS surface mutants. Up:
αS 11 aa imperfect repeats and the helical view of αS on the right. Below: Familial point
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 62
mutations in different surfaces are bolded. Combined surface mutants are rationally designed
to amplify the effect of the single familial mutation.
(E) Membrane-averse αS G510D and A30P familial mutations (and their extended surface
mutants 10 and 11, respectively) do not affect P-body interactions.
(F) Membrane avid αS mutants abrogate P-body interactions (see surface3 and 5).
(G) Increasing membrane avidity of αS by mutating Surface3 threonines to leucine
completely diminish decapping module binding.
(H) Non-membrane-bound αS mutant (T44P and A89P) interacts with decapping module
interactions through its first 10 aa.
(I) Among synuclein family members, only αS interacts with P-body components.
(J) Replacement of gamma synuclein residues in the first 20aa to alpha synuclein impairs
decapping binding.
(K) Proposed model for dichotomous interaction of αS with membranes or P-body
components.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 63
Figure 4. αS binds to multiple decapping-module components on the proximal region of the Edc4
scaffold
(A) Schematic of the question posed.
(B-D) αS-Edc4 interaction mapping. (B) Edc4 and αS interaction occurs on proximal
region of Edc4 between amino acids 1166-1265. (C) Edc4 Block4 as necessary for the αS
interaction. The blocks were assigned based on Edc4 alignments.
(D) Summary of Edc4 truncations and deletions for αS interaction mapping (Supp.Fig.4 for
the corresponding data).
(E) The Edc4-αS binding region modulates recruitment of decapping proteins. HA pulldown
of Edc4 variants in HEK293 EDC4-null background in HEK293 cells (See Supp.Fig.4 for
western blots).
(F) Edc4, Edc3 and Dcp1 proteins contribute to αS-decapping module interactions. Each bar
is the mean of two independent CRISPR line quantification (error= sd). (see Sup.Fig.4J for
western blots)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 64
(G) αS is embedded in decapping module at the proximal region of Edc4.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 65
Figure 5. αS interacts with Edc4 in human neurons in a dose-dependent manner and modulates
P-body number
(A) Strategy to generate human neurons with differential SNCA copy numbers (see methods
for details). Below; all-in-one PiggyBac construct to induce cortical neuron differentiation
from iPSCs.
(B) αS protein levels from whole cell extracts of induced neuron(iN) triplication series. Vcp
and Gapdh; endogenous markers.
(C) A modified all-in-one PiggyBac to induce cortical neuron differentiation and in situ
biotinylation of αS.
(D) IF images of differentiated induced neurons with pan-neuronal markers, Tuj1 and Map2.
Edc4 marks the P-body puncta. Below: fivefold magnification of the inlets.
(E) Biotinylated αS pulldown from induced neurons. PiggyBac depicted in (C) was used
for neuronal differentiation and αS-Avi biotinylation. Experiment is repeated after 3 and 4
weeks of differentiation.
(F) Endogenous αS interacts with Edc4 in a dose-dependent manner in iPSC-derived
neurons. Left: Immuno-Proximity ligation assay (PLA) for αS and Edc4 in 3-week-old
neurons with differing SNCA copy numbers. Right: Super plots of PLA experiment
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 66
quantification; 4 independent replicates across 3 neuronal differentiations (biological
replicates) are shown. Imaged fields represent the total number of images taken (each
image > 20 neurons). Summary statistics; ratiometric paired t-test (n=4, p=0.0008). Each
independent replicate is color-coded.
(G) Edc4 puncta numbers decrease in SNCA triplication compared wild-type (2-copy) levels
of SNCA. Left: IF for endogenous Edc4 and Tuj1(pan-neuronal marker) in 3-week-old iNs
with differing SNCA copy numbers. Merged channel images are shown. Right: Super plots
of IF quantifications; 4 independent replicates across 3 separate neuronal differentiations.
Summary statistics; ratiometric paired t-test (n=4, p=0.0196).
(H) IF of Edc4 puncta in neurons derived from an familial SNCA mutation (A53T) line
and its isogenically corrected control. Super plots of IF quantifications across two biological
replicates. Summary statistics; ratiometric paired t-test (n=2, p=0.0567)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 67
Figure 6. Pathologic αS increase disrupts decapping-module composition and mRNA turnover
rates in human neurons.
(A) Endogenous Edc4 immunoprecipitation (IP) after dox addition (10 ng/ml) in tetON
inducible SNCA and wt HEK293 cells (n=3, mean,sd, two-tailed t-test)
(B) Blue native-PAGE analysis of whole cell extracts from a tetON inducible SNCA
HEK293 cells.
(C-D) Superplots of PLA between Dcp1 and Edc4 in SNCA 4-copy and 2-copy neurons.
9 independent replicates across 3 neuronal differentiations, ratiometric paired t-test (n=9,
p=0.0004).
(E) Artificial tethering of αS to a nanoluciferase reporter mRNA.
(F) Strategy for ActinomycinD (ActD) pulse experiment to measure decay rate differences
in patient derived neurons with different SNCA copy numbers.
(G) Volcano plot for the differential gene expression between SNCA 2 and 4 copy neurons
(SNCA ~1.7 fold change in linear scale)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 68
(H) Hypothesis tested in ActD pulse experiment in patient derived triplication neurons.
Prediction: Δslope(2copy-4copy) < 0 indicating mRNA stabilization.
(I) Left panel: Slope diagram of transcripts with significant differential expression within the
first hour of ActD addition (1024 genes, FDR<0.05, Likelihood ratio test (LRT) of DeSeq2).
Right panel: Slopes of transcripts among the right panel that decayed in the 2-copy neurons
(n=709, unpaired t-test, p<0.001)
(J-L) Δslope histograms (2copy minus 4copy) for all decaying genes within the first hour of
ActD treatment in 2-copy neurons. Above the histogram is the question posed. (n; number
of decaying transcripts, p-value: paired one-sided t-test for the hypothesis if Δslope<0, The
summary of the test is depicted in the inlet). Histogram binning colors differentiate Δslope=0
boundary.
(M) Model proposed for αS accumulation impact of αS accumulation on decapping module
composition and mRNA decay rates.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 69
Figure 7. Postmortem brain and human-genetic analyses further connect P-body perturbations
to PD.
(A,B) PLA between Edc4-αSyn in PD patient and control brains and its quantification(D)
(*** p<0.001, one way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction, Map2 neuronal marker)
(C,D) PLA between Edc4-Dcp1 in PD patient and control brains and its quantification(E)
(*** p<0.001, one way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction)
(E-F) Common variant BridGE analysis in PD and ALS cohorts to infer putative gene-gene
interactions among P-body genes and SNCA. 53 P-body genes are grouped according to
their functions. At the center, the causal genes are shown, SNCA for PD and TDP-43 for
ALS. The map of significant SNP interactions (summarized at the gene level) with P-body
genes and TDP-43 (TARDBP) (G) and SNCA (H) are shown. Protective and deleterious
interactions are color coded. In (H), the LSM7 SNP GWAS genome-wide hit is indicated.
Reduced opacity: The intra P-body interactions, High opacity: SNCA and P-body gene
interactions.
(G) Logic of RVTT analysis. Left: Traditional Burden test collapse all mutations irrespective
of their frequency. Right: RVTT accounts for trends in qualifying-mutation proportions
in case versus controls. Mega-gene represents all genes in the pathway. Orange dots are
collapsed qualifying mutations.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Hallacli et al. Page 70
(H) Rare Variant Trend test (RVTT) analysis of P-body pathway genes In two different
PD cohorts, PPMI and PDBP, RVTT was applied to P-body genes. Two “bags” of P-body
genes were tested: CORE genes and DECAPPING genes, which are indicated in the lists.
Three separate mutation-types (missense damaging, missense neutral and synonymous) were
interrogated in both cohorts.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

---PAGE BREAK---

Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Hallacli et al. Page 71
Key resources table
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Anti-EDC4 Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Abcam Cat# ab72408,
RRID:AB_1268717
Anti-DCP1A mouse monoclonal antibody (M06), clone 3G4 Abnova Cat# H00055802-M06,
RRID:AB_530021
Anti-EDC3 antibody, rabbit polyclonal Abcam Cat# ab168851,
RRID:AB_2715533
Anti-Human Dcp2 rabbit Polyclonal Antibody Abcam Cat# ab28658,
RRID:AB_731858
Anti-XRN1 Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Bethyl Cat# A300-443A,
RRID:AB_2219047
Anti-G3BP antibody, monoclonal antibody Abcam Cat# ab56574,
RRID:AB_941699
Anti-p70 S6 kinase a (H-9), mouse monoclonal antibody (cross- Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-8418, RRID:AB_628094
reacts with Edc4)
Anti-VCP antibody, mouse monoclonal Abcam Cat# ab11433,
RRID:AB_298039
Anti-Human DDX6 Polyclonal, rabbit polyclonal Novus Cat# NB 200-191,
RRID:AB_523228
Anti-HA Epitope Tag Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Novus Cat# NB600-363,
RRID:AB_10001504
Anti-Lamin B1 Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Abcam Cat# ab16048,
RRID:AB_10107828
Anti-Histone H3 Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9715, RRID:AB_331563
Anti-LSM14A/RAP55 Antibody, rabbit polyclonal Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# A305-102A,
RRID:AB_2631497
Anit-eIF4E (P-2) antibody, mouse monoclonal Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-9976, RRID:AB_627502
Anti-Tubulin beta 3 (TUBB3) antibody, TUJ1 clone, mouse BioLegend Cat# 801201,
monoclonal RRID:AB_2313773
Anti-GAPDH (GA1R) antibody, mouse monoclonal Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# MA5-15738,
RRID:AB_10977387
Anti-alpha Synuclein Monoclonal Antibody (4B12), used for Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# MA1-90346,
western blots RRID:AB_1954821
Anti-Human Alpha -synuclein (211) Monoclonal, used for PLA Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat# sc-12767,
assays in induced neurons RRID:AB_628318
Anti-SNCA antibody (Clone 42/α-Synuclein (RUO), aka SYN1), BD Biosciences Cat# 610787, RRID:AB_398108
used in brain PLA experiments
Anti-MAP2 antibody, rabbit polyclonal Millipore Cat# AB5543,
RRID:AB_571049
Bacterial and virus strains
Biological samples
Post-mortem brain samples for PLA analysis are detailed in Mayo Clinic Florida Brain Bank N/A
TableS7
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Human recombinant brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Peprotech 450-02
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.

---PAGE BREAK---

Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Hallacli et al. Page 72
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Human recombinant glia-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Peprotech 450-10
Pierce High Sensitivity Streptavidin-HRP Life Technologies 21130
Poly-D-Lysine Thermo Fisher A3890401
Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail Sigma Aldrich 11873580001
PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail Sigma Aldrich 4906845001
RIPA Lysis Buffer Thermo Fisher 89900
TCEP Bond Breaker Thermo Fisher 77720
MyOneT1 Streptavidin magnetic Dynabeads Invitrogen 65601
cAMP Sigma D0260
Poly-Ethylenimine (PEI) Thermo Fisher 24765-1
Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads Life Technologies 88836
Lipofectamine 2000 Thermo Fisher 11668
B27 PLUS supplement Life Technologies A35828-01
Matrigel® Growth Factor Reduced (GFR) Basement Membrane Corning 354230
Matrix
Neurobasal Media Gibco 21103049
N2 supplement Life Technology 17502-048
Rock Inhibitor (Y-27632 DiHydrochloride) Peprotech 1293823
TransIT-LT1 Transfection Reagent Mirus MIR2304
B27 supplement Gibco 17504044
Laminin Sigma L2020
Cytosine B-D-Arabinofuranoside Hydrochloride (Arac) Sigma-Aldrich C6645
Critical commercial assays
ExpiSf™ Expression System Starter Kit Thermo Fisher A38841
QIAamp DNA Mini Kit Qiagen 51304
TaqMan SNCA copy number assay (Hs02236645_cn) Thermo Fisher 4400291
BCA Protein Assay Kit Pierce 23225
SilverQuest™ Silver Staining Kit Invitrogen LC6070
Duolink™ In Situ Orange Starter Kit Mouse/Rabbit Sigma Aldrich DUO92102
PureLink RNA Mini Kit Invitrogen 12183020
KAPA mRNA HyperPrep Kit KAPA Biosystems KR1352 – v4.17
NativePAGE™ Sample Prep Kit Invitrogen BN2008
NanoGlo Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System Promega N1610
Superscript™ IV VILO™ (SSIV VILO) Master Mix Life Technologies 11756050
Deposited data
SILAC MS data for alpha-Synuclein interaction This study ftp://massive.ucsd.edu/
MSV000089026/.
Bulk RNAseq from Ngn2 induced neurons This study Geo; GSE199349
BridGE PD Cohort1; PD-NGRC http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000196.v3.p1
entrez?db=gap
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.

---PAGE BREAK---

Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Hallacli et al. Page 73
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
BridGE PD Cohort2; PD-NIA http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000089.v3.p2
entrez?db=gap
BridGE PD Cohort3; PD-LEAPS http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000048.v1.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE PD Cohort4; PD-CIDR http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000126.v2.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE PD Cohort5; PD-IPDGC http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000918.v1.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE PD Cohort6; PD-APDGC http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000394.v1.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE PD Cohort7; PD-AMP the Accelerating Medicines https://amp-pd.org/
Partnership
BridGE ALS Cohort1; ALS-Irish http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000127.v2.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE ALS Cohort2; ALS-Finland http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000344.v1.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE ALS Cohort3; ALS-NIH-HumanHap http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000101.v3.p1
entrez?db=gap
BridGE ALS Cohort4; ALS-NIH-OmniExpress http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/ phs000101.v3.p1
entrez?db=gap
PDBP (Parkinson’s Disease Biomarker Program) used for RVTT https://amp-pd.org/ AMP-PD 2020 Release
analysis
PPMI (Parkinson’s Progressive Marker Initiative) used for RVTT https://amp-pd.org/ AMP-PD 2020 Release
analysis
Experimental models: Cell lines
HEK Flp-In™ T-REx™ 293 Cell Line Thermo Fisher R78007, RRID:CVCL_U427
SNCA triplication iPSC, Iowa Kindred NINDS Human Cell and Data Patient code: NDS00201; iPSC
Repository line code: ND34391
All cell lines generated/used in TableS3 This study N/A
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
D. melanogaster: RNAi for XRN1: XRN1HMS01169 (STOCK1) Bloomington Drosophila Stock BDSC:34690 FBst0034690
Center RRID: BDSC_34690
D. melanogaster: RNAi for XRN1: XRN1GLC01410 (STOCK2) Bloomington Drosophila Stock BDSC:44442 FBst0044442
Center RRID: BDSC_44442
D. melanogaster: QUAS-a-synuclein(WT) Ordonez et al, 2018, Sarkar et al, N/A
2021
Newly generated S.cerevisiae strains are found in Table S1 This study N/A
Oligonucleotides
Fly qPCR probes; XRN1 Forward: This study N/A
GCGAGGAGGTCAAGTTCGG
Fly qPCR probes; XRN1 Reverse: This study N/A
GCTCGTCTGTTCTCAGGGC
Fly qPCR probes; Rpl32 Forward: This study N/A
GACCATCCGCCCAGCATAC
Fly qPCR probes; Rpl32 Reverse: CGGCGACGCACTCTGTT This study N/A
Guide RNA oligos used in this study: TableS4 This study N/A
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.

---PAGE BREAK---

Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Hallacli et al. Page 74
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Recombinant DNA
pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro (PX459) V2.0 (Ran et al., 2013) Addgene:62988
Plasmids used in this study: TableS3 This study N/A
Software and algorithms
MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) Cox and Mann, 2008 N/A
FastQC (version 0.11.5) Andrews, 2010 https://
www.bioinformatics.babraham.a
c.uk/projects/fastqc/
STAR (version 2.5.3a) for ROSMAP STAR (version 2.7.3) for Dobin et al., 2013 https://github.com/alexdobin/
RNA decay analysis STAR
RSEM (version 1.2.31) Li and Dewey, 2011 https://deweylab.github.io/
RSEM/
Multiqc (version 1.5) Ewels et al., 2016 https://multiqc.info/
Picard Toolkit (version 2.17.4) Broad Institute http://broadinstitute.github.io/
picard/
R statistical software (version 3.6.3) R Core Team, 2021 https://www.r-project.org/
“limma” (R package) (version 3.38.3) Ritchie et al., 2015 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
25605792/
“voom” (R package) (version 3.5.2) Law et al., 2014 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
2448524/
“tmod” (R package) (version 0.46.2) Weiner, 2020 https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/tmod/index.html
GO.db (R package) (version 3.10.0) Carlson, 2019 https://www.bioconductor.org/
packages/release/data/
annotation/html/GO.db.html
REVIGO Supek et al., 2011
RNA-seq analysis source code This paper DOI:10.5281/zenodo.6477548
The BridGE software analysis Fang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017 DOI:10.5281/zenodo.6473560
Custom FIJI macros This study N/A
Other
Q Exactive mass spectrometer Thermo Scientific N/A
Easy-nLC 1000 UPLC Proxeon N/A
96-well glass bottom microplate for imaging Brooks Life Science Systems MGB096-1-2-LG-L
Poly-L-Ornithine/Laminin 6-Well Clear Flat Bottom Tc-Treated Corning 354658
Plate
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 22.

---PAGE BREAK---

