REVIEWS
TARGETING PROGRAMMED CELL
DEATH IN NEURODEGENERATIVE
DISEASES
Miquel Vila* and Serge Przedborski*‡§
Molecular pathways of programmed cell death (PCD) are activated in various neurodegenerative
disorders including Parkinson’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Huntington’s disease. In
these diseases, PCD might be pathogenic, and targeting it might mitigate neurodegeneration. To
identify potential neuroprotective targets within the PCD machinery, the expression and activity of
some of its components have been altered by genetic or pharmacological means in experimental
models of neurodegenerative diseases. The results of these studies have provided leads for the
development of neuroprotective strategies for these progressive, disabling and often fatal disorders.
NEUROLOGICAL DISEASES
Programmed cell death (PCD) is a physiological cell death forms that involve active intracellular
TUNEL TECHNIQUE
This technique enables the process in which molecular programs that are intrin- processes,and use ‘apoptosis’only in reference to the
visualization ofcells undergoing sic to the cell are activated to cause its destruction. morphology ofdying cells.
apoptosis by labelling the This process is a fundamental property ofall multi- Over the past ten years,three experimental waves
broken ends ofthe double-
cellular organisms and is crucial for their development, have characterized the study ofPCD in neurodegenera-
stranded DNA with biotin-
conjugated dUTP,using the for organ morphogenesis,for tissue homeostasis and tion.Initially,the focus was on the search for apoptotic
enzyme terminal for defense against infected or damaged cells.The cells in post mortemtissues.This effort was undertaken
deoxynucleotidyl transferase. importance ofPCD is emphasized by its remarkable in relation to several neurodegenerative disorders and
degree ofevolutionary conservation.However,exces- gave rise to conflicting results.One lesson learned from
sive PCD can cause unwarranted cell death,which these investigations was that looking for apoptosis in
might lead to diseases such as immunodeficiency and post mortemhuman tissue is complicated by many con-
neurodegeneration. ceptual and technical factors.First,it is difficult to detect
The term PCD is often used interchangeably with apoptosis owing to the presumed low daily rate of
‘apoptosis’— a morphological form ofcell death that neuron loss in neurodegenerative disorders and the pre-
is characterized by membrane blebbing,shrinkage of sumed rapid disappearance ofapoptotic cells.Second,
the cell body,nuclear condensation and DNA frag- post mortemspecimens typically derive from advanced
mentation.However,apoptosis is only one morpho- stages ofthe disease,when most ofthe neurons that are
*Department ofNeurology, logical form ofPCD1;the molecular pathways linked affected by the pathological process are already lost.
‡Department ofPathology, to PCD are implicated in cell-death processes,the Third,most morphological post mortem studies rely on
and §Center for Neurobiology
morphological diversity of which extends beyond the so-called terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-
and Behavior,Columbia
University,650 West 168th apoptosis2,3.At times,even necrosis,which is tradi- mediated dUTP nick-end labelling (TUNEL) TECHNIQUEto
Street,BB-307,New York, tionally considered to be a ‘passive’death process (that document the presence ofapoptotic cells.However,we
New York 10032,USA. is,death that does not rely on intracellular signalling now know that TUNEL is not specific for apoptosis,
Correspondence to M.V.
pathways),has been prevented by anti-PCD com- especially in human post mortem tissue, in which
e-mail:
pounds4.In this article,we group under the term PCD factors such as hypoxia can produce TUNEL-positive,
MV199@columbia.edu.
doi:10.1038/nrn1100 (also sometimes referred to as ‘active cell death’5) all non-apoptotic DNA damage6.
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |1
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Box 1 | Programmed cell death and Alzheimer’s disease Molecular pathways of PCD
The key mediators ofPCD are the proteolytic enzymes
Amyloid-β(Aβ) — a peptide that accumulates in the brains ofpeople with Alzheimer’s called ‘caspases’,which cleave their substrates after spe-
disease (AD) and forms amyloid plaques — directly induces apoptosis ofcultured
cific aspartic acid residues.Caspases exist as ZYMOGENS
neurons143.Therefore,many researchers have looked for signs ofprogrammed cell death
(procaspases) in almost every animal cell,and they
(PCD) in Alzheimer patients.Along this line,fragmentation ofnuclear DNA,detected
become activated in response to intracellular signalling
by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labelling
pathways that are triggered by various cellular perturba-
(TUNEL)144,has been detected in brains ofpeople with AD,although this technique
tions,such as DNA damage and withdrawal oftrophic
lacks specificity.More specific biochemical evidence that PCD might occur in AD is
support.The family ofmammalian caspases comprises
provided by the detection ofactivated caspases 3,8 and 9 in hippocampal neurons of
15 members,which can be divided into initiators (pro-
brains affected by AD145–148.Moreover,pharmacological or molecular inhibition of
caspases 2,8,9 and 10) and effectors (procaspases 3,6
particular members ofthe caspase family,such as caspases 2,3,8 and 12,has been
reported to offer partial or complete protection against Aβ-induced apoptotic cell death and 7) ofPCD.
in vitro25,149–151.Aβis derived from γ-secretase-mediated processing ofthe amyloid The initiators are the first caspases to become activated
precursor protein (APP),but it has been shown,in both cultured cells and brains in the PCD cascade.They have long amino-terminal
affected by AD,that APP can also be cleaved by caspases,such as caspase 3,at sites prodomains that contain specific protein–protein interac-
distinct from the classic secretase-processing sites152.Caspase-mediated cleavage ofAPP tion motifs.Through these domains,initiator caspases8
not only releases Aβ,but can also release a carboxy-terminal peptide that is a potent and 9are activated after being aggregated by the adaptor
inducer ofapoptosis153.Similarly,caspase 3-cleaved fragments oftau,a microtubule- molecules FADD(Fas-associating protein with death
associated protein that is the primary protein component ofthe filaments found in the domain)10and Apaf1(apoptotic protease-activatingfac-
brains ofpeople with AD,have also been detected in post mortemsamples148.Despite all tor 1)11,respectively.On activation,initiator caspases can
ofthese data,there is no evidence ofcaspase activation or apoptotic cell death in animal cleave effector procaspases into their active forms,which
models ofAD and,therefore,there is no evidence in vivofor a potential beneficial effect are responsible for events such as mitochondrial damage,
ofblocking PCD pathways in AD. nuclear membrane breakdown,DNA fragmentation,
chromatin condensation and,eventually,cell death.
The Bcl2 family ofproteins,which are implicated in
Given these problems, many investigators have the regulation ofPCD,comprises members that have
stopped using an exclusively morphological approach, either anti-PCD (such as Bcl2and Bcl-x) or pro-PCD
L
and now include techniques that assess molecular (such as Baxand Bak) effects12.Structurally,they all
components of the PCD machinery.Although this share some degree ofsimilarity and can have up to four
combined approach has often shed light on the state of Bcl2-homology domains (BH1–BH4).Besides the many
PCD in neurodegenerative diseases,none ofthese post Bcl2 members that contain BH domains,such as Bcl2
mortemfindings have established a role for PCD in the per seand Bax,there are molecules that share sequence
pathogenic process. homology only with the BH3 domain,such as Bidor
More recently,investigators have lost interest in Bim.These BH3-only proteins can act as intracellular
the demonstration ofPCD-associated cellular and death ligands,proximal to multidomain Bcl2 members,
molecular changes in human tissues,and they now and can connect with proximal signal transduction
focus on showing the actual role of PCD in the pathways13.Multidomain Bcl2 members can preserve
neurodegenerative process.To achieve this goal,key or disrupt mitochondrial integrity by regulating the
PCD molecules have been manipulated (either in release ofmitochondrial apoptogenic factors such as
transgenic or knockout studies), or inhibited by cytochrome c,Smac/Diabloor apoptosis-inducing fac-
pharmacological agents or viral vectors in experi- tor (AIF).Bcl2 can also inhibit initiator caspases by a
mental models ofneurodegenerative disorders.These mitochondrial-independent mechanism14.
studies have not only identified PCD components
that either promote or prevent neuronal death,but The death receptor (or extrinsic) PCD pathway.The
they have also disclosed molecular targets for the extrinsic PCD pathway (FIG.1)is recruited on activation
development ofdrugs for preventing and treating ofcell-surface death receptors such as Fas/CD95 and the
neurodegenerative disorders. tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1).Death-
In this article,after discussing the molecular com- receptor activation is initiated by specific ligands called
position ofthe PCD machinery,we review the results death activators — the Fas ligand binds to Fas,and
ofmanipulating such molecular pathways on the fate TNFαbinds to TNFR1.On binding,the intracellular
ofneurons in experimental models ofthree promi- ‘death domains’on these receptors associate with an
nent neurodegenerative disorders:Parkinson’s disease adaptor protein that contains ‘death effector domains’,
(PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Fas associates with FADD, and TNFR1 associates
Huntington’s disease(HD).Although some work has with FADD and TRADD(TNFR-associated protein
been done on PCD in Alzheimer’s disease7(BOX 1),the with death domain).Adaptor proteins then recruit pro-
benefit oftargeting PCD in experimental models of caspase 8,leading to its activation.Activated caspase 8
Alzheimer’s disease remains to be determined;so,we can then activate other caspases,either directly or indi-
ZYMOGENS will not discuss Alzheimer’s disease here.Similarly,we rectly,by cleaving Bid (FIG.1).The extrinsic PCD path-
The inactive precursors of
will not discuss PCD in stroke8,as this disorder falls way is especially instrumental in pathological conditions
enzymes — often transformed
outside the scope ofan article on neurodegenerative in which inflammation is a prominent feature.Because
into the active enzyme by partial
proteolysis. diseases9. there is a growing appreciation that inflammation is a
2|MAY 2003 |VOLUME 4 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Extracellular death signals the release ofAIF and endonuclease G from the mito-
FasL chondrial intermembrane space does not lead to caspase
activation22,23.Under certain death-inducing stimuli,AIF
translocates from the mitochondria to the nucleus where
Intracellular death signals Fas it induces caspase-independent,large-scale DNA frag-
mentation22.Similarly,endonuclease G,which is nor-
mally involved in the replication ofmitochondrial DNA,
Bax Bid Caspase 8 can translocate to the nucleus on induction ofPCD,
Bak
tBid and can induce fragmentation ofnuclear DNA23.It has
Bcl2
been reported that wah-1, the AIF homologue in
Bcl-x
L Mitochondrion Caenorhabditis elegans,associates and cooperates with
Endoplasmic
endonuclease G to promote DNA degradation and
reticulum
stress apoptosis24.
Smac/Diablo
Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),including
Cyt. c
the disruption ofcalcium homeostasis and accumula-
IAP tion ofunfolded proteins in the ER,can also result in
Cyt. c PCD25through activation ofcaspase 12.Active caspase
AIF Apaf1 Caspase 9 Caspase 12
12 can,in turn,cleave caspase 9 (REF.26).Pro-PCD mem-
bers of the Bcl2 family — such as Bax and Bak —
operate at the ER to maintain calcium homeostasis and
Executioner regulate ER-dependent PCD27.
caspases
Targeting PCD in Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative
Cell death
disorder ofunknown cause,characterized by resting
tremor,slowness ofmovement,rigidity and postural
instability28.PD symptoms are attributed to the loss of
Figure 1 |Molecular pathways of programmed cell death.Extracellular signals through cellular
dopamine (DA)-containing neurons in the substantia
death receptors, such as Fas, and intracellular signals, including damage to subcellular constituents
nigra pars compacta (SNPC).In the United States alone,
or endoplasmic reticulum stress, both trigger genetically programmed pathways of programmed
cell death (PCD). The two main PCD pathways result in the activation of downstream executioner this disease affects about one million people28.Although
caspases and cell death. AIF, apoptosis-inducing factor; Cyt., cytochrome; FasL, Fas ligand; several approved drugs alleviate PD symptoms,none of
IAP, inhibitor of apoptosis; tBid, truncated Bid. them seem to stop or slow the neurodegenerative process.
Initially,the demonstration ofincreased numbers of
TUNEL-positive DA neurons in the brains ofpatients
feature ofneurodegeneration with potential pathogenic with PD has been used to support the occurrence of
significance15,targeting the extrinsic PCD pathway in apoptosis in this disease29.Subsequent studies,using a
neurodegenerative diseases is a warranted approach.In greater variety ofmorphological tools,have either suc-
addition to being activated by the extrinsic pathway, ceeded30–32or failed33–35to find more apoptotic neurons
procaspase 8 also seems to be cleaved by a mechanism in post mortemtissue from PD patients,leading to lively
that depends on the intrinsic pathway16. discussions in the field about whether apoptosis in PD is
The mitochondrial (or intrinsic) PCD pathway.In the a myth or a reality.Moving away from morphological
intrinsic PCD pathway,death receptor-independent assessments,immunolocalization ofBax shows that a
stimuli can trigger PCD by inducing translocation of greater percentage ofDA neurons in the SNPC were posi-
pro-PCD molecules (such as Bax) to the mitochondria, tive for this pro-PCD protein in brains ofpatients with
with the subsequent release ofmitochondrial apopto- PD as compared with controls36.In addition,Bax content
genic factors (such as cytochrome c) to the cytosol (FIG.1). seemed higher in the remaining DA neurons37,consistent
Once releasedfrom the mitochondria,cytochrome c with an ongoing neurodegenerative process.DA neurons
interacts with two other cytosolic protein factors11,Apaf1 with increased expression and subcellular redistribution
and procaspase 9,to activate caspase 3.The formation of ofthe anti-PCD protein Bcl-x,and with increased activ-
L
this multimeric Apaf1–cytochrome ccomplex might ity ofthe effector protease caspase 3,have been found in
serve to increase the localconcentration ofprocaspases greater abundance in the SNPC ofpeople with PD as
for intermolecular cleavage,and to set a relatively high compared with controls38,39,although these findings
threshold ofcaspase activation so that an occasional leak- could not be independently confirmed35.Other PCD-
age of cytochrome cwill not cause cellsto undergo related alterations detected in the brain ofpatients with
PCD17.Smac/Diablo is another mitochondrial inter- PD include the activation ofcaspase 8 (REFS 40,41)and cas-
membrane protein that is released into the cytosol on pase 9 (REF.41).But despite this body ofdescriptive data,
induction ofPCD18,19.Once in the cytosol,Smac/Diablo the evidence cannot be regarded as an unequivocal
interacts with several inhibitors ofapoptosis (IAPs), demonstration that PCD has a pathogenic role in PD.
therefore relieving the inhibitory effect ofIAPs on initia- To address this crucial issue,it is necessary to use
tor (such as caspase 9) and effector caspases (such as cas- experimental models that allow manipulations ofthe
pase 3)20,21.In contrast to cytochrome c and Smac/Diablo, PCD machinery and to assess their impact on neuronal
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |3
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Alterations in energy metabolism,generation of
Box 2 | The MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and perturbations in cal-
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a by-product ofthe chemical cium homeostasis occur within hours ofMPTP admin-
synthesis ofa meperidine analogue with potent heroin-like effects that can induce a istration — well before any significant neuronal death
parkinsonian syndrome in humans almost indistinguishable from Parkinson’s disease has occurred49 — raising the possibility that these events
(PD)154.Since the discovery that MPTP causes parkinsonism in humans and non-human are not the main effectors ofcell death.Instead,they
primates,as well as in various other mammalian species,it has been used extensively as a
could be intracellular signals that can set into motion
model ofPD.From neuropathological data,MPTP administration causes damage to the
deleterious molecular cascades — such as PCD activa-
nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) pathway identical to that seen in PD,with the exception of
tion — which are ultimately responsible for the demise
the intraneuronal inclusions known as Lewy bodies.It is worthwhile noting that post
ofDA neurons.The prolonged administration ofrela-
mortembrain samples from patients with PD show a selective defect in the mitochondrial
tively low doses ofMPTP to mice leads to morphologi-
electron transport chain complex that is affected by MPTP155,156.The metabolism of
cally defined apoptotic DA neurons50.Under this regime
MPTP is a complex,multistep process (see figure).After its systemic administration,
ofMPTP intoxication,Bax is strongly upregulated in
MPTP,which is a pro-toxin,rapidly crosses the blood–brain barrier and is metabolized to
SNPC DA neurons51,whereas Bcl2 is downregulated.In
1-methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridinium (MPDP+) by the enzyme monoamine
this model,activation ofBax induces the recruitment of
oxidase B (MAO-B) in non-DA cells,and then,probably by spontaneous oxidation,to
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+),the active toxic compound.MPP+is then taken the mitochondrial PCD pathway,with the subsequent
up by DA transporters,for which it has high affinity.Once inside DA neurons,MPP+is activationofcaspase 9 and caspase 3 (REFS 38,41).The key
concentrated by an active process within the mitochondria,where it impairs role ofBax in MPTP-induced neurotoxicity is illustrated
mitochondrial respiration by inhibiting complex I ofthe electron transport chain.The by the demonstration that mutant mice deficient in Bax
inhibition ofcomplex I impedes the flow ofelectrons along the mitochondrial electron are resistant to the toxicity ofMPTP51.Overexpression
transport chain,resulting in an increased production offree radicals,which causes ofBcl2also protects DA cells against MPTP-induced
oxidative stress and activation ofprogrammed cell death molecular pathways. neurodegeneration52,53.
How the deregulation ofBcl2 family members occurs
Blood–brain barrier after MPTP administration is unknown.It is improbable
that MPTP directly alters Bax expression and conforma-
tion.Instead,it is more plausible that MPTP activates
intracellular signalling pathways,which,in turn,cause
Bax upregulation and its post-translational activation
Mitochondrion
(for example,Bax oligomerization and internalization
Complex I into mitochondrial membranes).The tumour supressor
protein p53is one ofthe rare molecules known to regu-
late Baxexpression54,and p53 is activated after MPTP
intoxication55,probably in response to MPTP-induced
Blood Glial cell Synaptic vesicle
DNA damage56.Inhibition ofp53 attenuates MPTP-
induced Bax upregulation and the degeneration of
MAO-B
MPTP MPP+ MPP+ DA neurons57.In addition,p53 null mice are resistant to
the MPTP-induced death ofDA neurons58.Activation of
DA
transporter the Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway has also been
MPTP MPTP Vesicular observed after MPTP administration59,60.Moreover,
monoamine pharmacological blockade ofJNK activation with CEP-
transporter
1347/KT-7515 (REF.61)or CEP-11004,or its inhibition
by adenoviral gene transfer ofthe JNK-binding domain
of JNK-interacting protein 1 (REF.60) resulted in a
marked attenuation ofMPTP-induced neurodegenera-
tion.In vitroevidence indicates that JNK activation
caused by DNA damage is requiredfor the mitochondr-
death.For the past twenty years,the 1-methyl-4-phenyl- ial translocation ofBax and the resulting recruitment of
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model ofPD the mitochondrial PCD pathway62,63.These data indicate
has generated important insights into PD pathogenesis that,in the MPTP mouse model ofPD,both p53 and
and the role ofPCD in PD (BOX 2).In addition to the JNK might act in concert to cause Bax induction and the
MPTP model,the chronic infusion ofrotenone to rats, post-translational changes that are mandatory to its
which recapitulates most ofthe pathological hallmarks of pro-PCD role.
PD42,is emerging as an invaluable model to investigate The intrinsic PCD pathway is recruited after MPTP
PD pathogenesis.But compared to MPTP,the rotenone administration41,and blockade ofthis PCD pathway by
model is technically challenging and might not be as an intrastriatal injection ofan adeno-associated viral
specific for the SNPC DA neurons43 as initally claimed42. (AAV) vector containing a DOMINANT-NEGATIVE form of
DOMINANT NEGATIVE Genetic models of PD,based on the overexpression Apaf1 prevents the MPTP-induced activation ofcaspase
A mutant molecule that can ofα-synuclein,have also been developed (see later discus- 3 and the ensuing SNPC neuronal death64.By contrast,
form a heteromeric complex
sion)44–48,but the lack ofconsistent SNPC DA neurode- data on the recruitment and the importance ofthe
with the normal molecule,
generation makes these models more suitable for studying extrinsic PCD pathway in the MPTP mouse model is
knocking out the activity ofthe
entire complex. pathogenic processes other than DA neuronal death. still lacking.
4|MAY 2003 |VOLUME 4 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
selectively at the level of the cell body.The broad-
spectrum caspase inhibitor benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-
Asp-fluoromethylketone (zVAD-fmk),and peptide
Baculoviral p35 Tg
rAAV-XIAP inhibitors ofcaspases 2,3 and 9 attenuate the loss of
MPP+ rAAV-apaf1-DN Caspase inhibitors DA-containing ventral midbrain cell bodies (but not
neurites) exposed to the active metabolite ofMPTP —
Mitochondrion
Apaf1 Caspase 9 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) — in culture66.
This observation indicates that the molecular pathways
Cyt. c Cyt. c
MPP+ Complex I that lead to the destruction ofthe soma might differ
inhibition Bax Caspase 3 from those that govern axonal degeneration67. In
another study40,zVAD-fmk failed to protect cultured
DA Bcl2 Bcl2 Tg ventral midbrain neurons from the effect ofMPP+,but
instead triggered a morphological switch from apopto-
ROS Bax Bax KO sis to necrosis.Minocycline,a clinically approved tetra-
cycline derivative that inhibits microglial activation and
CEP1347 presumably also inhibits caspase 1and caspase 3 (REF.68),
CEP-11004 JNK/Jun mitigates MPTP-induced neurodegeneration69,70.
rAAV-JBD
Caspase 8,an initiator caspase in the extrinsic PCD
pathway,is also activated in MPTP-treated mice and in
DNA strand breaks p53 P
patients with PD40,41.Paradoxically,activation ofcaspase
p53 KO 8 in the MPTP model occurs after the recruitment of
pifithrin-α/Z-1-117
the intrinsic,and not the extrinsic,PCD pathway41,indi-
cating that caspase 8 might participate in the amplifica-
p53 tion,rather than in the initiation ofthe PCD in SNPC
Cell death
DA neurons.
Figure 2 | Proposed mechanism of MPTP-induced programmed cell death.
Another molecule that has been linked to neuro-
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), the toxic metabolite of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
degeneration in PD is α-synuclein,mutations ofwhich
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), impairs mitochondrial respiration in dopaminergic neurons by inhibiting
complex I of the electron transport chain. Inhibition of complex I impedes the flow of electrons along cause a familial form ofPD71,72.α-Synuclein is also an
the mitochondrial electron transport chain, resulting in an increased production of reactive oxygen important component ofthe neuropathological hall-
species (ROS). MPP+can also redistribute vesicular dopamine (DA) to the cytosol. There, DA readily mark of the disease — the intracellular inclusions
auto-oxidizes, thereby generating ROS. Both mitochondrial and cytolsolic MPP+-related ROS known as Lewy bodies73.In MPTP-treated animals,
produtions damage cellular elements, including DNA, and probably alter the expression of redox- α-synuclein accumulates and becomes nitrated in
sensitive transcription factors. ROS and damaged DNA activate p53, which induces upregulation of
the cytosol of SNPC DA neurons74,75. Ablation of
Bax. Bax is subsequently translocated into the mitochondria, probably by mediation of Jun N-
α-synuclein in mice prevents MPTP-induced neuro-
terminal kinase (JNK), where it induces the release of cytochrome (cyt.) cto the cytosol and the
ensuing caspase activation and cell death. Approaches aimed at targeting different key elements of degeneration76.Although a direct link between α-synu-
this cascade (red boxes) result in an attenuation of MPTP-induced neurodegeneration. DN, clein and DA cell death is not yet well established,
dominant-negative; JBD, JNK-binding domain; KO, knockout; rAAV, adeno-associated virus vector expression ofmutant α-synuclein in cell cultures pro-
delivery; tBid, truncated bid; Tg, transgenic, XIAP; X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis. motes apoptosis77,and cytochrome cstimulates the
aggregation ofα-synuclein in vitro78,79.Other pathways
might also be involved in triggering PCD in PD.For
Approaches that are aimed at inhibiting PCD at the example,in the substantia nigra from patients with PD,
level ofthe effector caspases have given inconsistent the levels ofthe antioxidant glutathione are reduced80
results.Adenoviral gene transfer ofX-chromosome- — an event that can induce PCD in neurons81.
linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) — a protein Together,these data indicate that the molecular path-
caspase inhibitor — prevents MPTP-induced SNPC ways ofPCD are involved in the death ofSNPC DA neu-
neuronal death,but does not prevent the loss ofstriatal rons in experimental models ofPD (FIG.2).They support
DA nerve fibres65. By contrast, transgenic mice the contention that alterations in the components ofthe
overexpressing p35 — a general caspase inhibitor — in PCD machinery that have been identified in the brain of
neurons showed attenuated MPTP-induced DA cell people with PD are ofpathological importance.It is note-
death and striatal DA depletion41.The discrepancy worthy that targeting PCD upstream ofits execution
between these two studies might be explained by the phase results in a marked attenuation ofneurodegenera-
more comprehensive inhibition ofcaspases mediated by tion,whereas interfering at a more downstream level,
p35compared with XIAP,as p35 not only inhibits exe- such as caspase activation,produces variable results.This
cutioner caspases (such as caspases 3 and 7),but also is oftherapeutic relevance because,once the caspase exe-
upstream initiator caspases,such as caspases 8 and 9.In cutioner program is in place,its inhibition might only
both studies,however,DA cell death was assessed early delay cell death.As the symptoms ofPD are caused by the
after MPTP administration,raising the question of loss ofDA terminals in the striatum,preventing the death
whether the obtained effect indicates an actual protec- ofSNPC cell bodies without preventing the degeneration
tion or merely a delay in the cell death process.Similar oftheir axons is unlikely to be a helpful therapeutic
to the findings with XIAP,some in vitrostudies indicate strategy. Neurons might have two self-destruction
that it is possible to produce resistance to cell death programmes,one for PCD in the cell body and a second
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |5
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Box 3 |The transgenic SOD1model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis axonal transport96.It might therefore be possible that
mutant SOD1,by stimulating protein aggregation,
After the discovery that mutations in the gene that encodes the cytosolic free radical
causes important motor neuron perturbations that,in
scavenging enzyme copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) are responsible for the
turn,trigger PCD.
familial form ofamyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)157,158,it has been shown that the
Although there are numerous reports on the neu-
transgenic expression ofdifferent SOD1mutants in mice83–85 and rats86replicates the
ropathological changes in the spinal cord ofpeople with
clinical and pathological hallmarks ofALS.The age at onset ofsymptoms and the life
ALS, only a handful provide fine morphological
span ofthese transgenic animals varies across different lines,depending on the mutation
descriptions of the dying motor neurons97,98.Some
and its level ofexpression,but when symptoms appear,they invariably include motor
degenerating neurons have some features reminiscent of
abnormalities that progress with the same pattern as ALS84,159.The first motor
apoptosis,but none ofthese dying neurons can confi-
abnormality in mice is a fine tremor,in at least one limb,when the animal is held in the
air by the tail159.Thereafter,weakness and atrophy ofproximal muscles,predominating dently be labelled as apoptotic.In mice transgenic for
in the hindlimbs,develop progressively.At the end-stage ofthe disease (~140 days),mice mutant SOD1,clear apoptotic cells are seen in the spinal
transgenic for mutant SOD1 (G93A) are severely paralyzed and can no longer feed or cord,but are they are rare99and can be immunoreactive
drink on their own159.These end-stage mice have a profound loss ofmotor neurons for neurofilament or glial fibrillary acid protein100,indi-
(~50%),many dystrophic neurites,marked gliosis,some Lewy body-like intracellular cating that both neuronal and glial cells are dying by
inclusions and motor neurons filled with phosphorylated neurofilaments83,159–162. apoptosis in this model.Non-apoptotic PCD variants,
such as PARAPTOSIS3also seem to occur in this animal
model ofALS101.The search for other markers ofapop-
one for the axon67.So,a combination ofanti-PCD strate- tosis in ALS has generated conflicting results.In one post
gies might be required to obtain optimal clinical benefit mortemstudy,DNA fragmentation was detected by
from such neuroprotective approaches. TUNEL in the spinal cord motor neurons from patients
with ALS,but not from controls102.In two other studies,
Targeting PCD in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis DNA fragmentation was detected not only in the motor
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a relentless,fatal cortex and spinal cord ofpeople with ALS,but also in
disorder that is characterized by a loss ofthe motor controls,although to a lesser degree103,104.In a subse-
neurons in the cerebral cortex and spinal cord82.The quent study,internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was
progressive decline of muscular function results in detected in the motor cortex and spinal cord ofpatients
paralysis,speech and swallowing disabilities,emotional with ALS, but not in spared regions, such as the
disturbance and,ultimately,respiratory failure,causing somatosensory cortex98.Here,DNA fragmentation was
death within 2–5 years after the onset ofthe disease.So documented in the anterior horn ofthe spinal cord and
far,only a few approved treatments (such as mechanical in the motor cortex ofpatients by gel electrophoresis98
ventilation and riluzole) prolong survival in patients — a highly specific technique that is not frequently used
with ALS to some extent. to identify apoptosis in the nervous system because ofits
Whereas about 90% ofALS cases are sporadic (they lack ofsensitivity.In contrast to these positive findings,
show no genetic linkage),about 10% are inherited82. other investigators,using similar techniques and tissue
Ofthese,about a fifth carry a dominant mutation in samples,have failed to provide any evidence ofinternu-
superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1).Transgenic expression cleosomal cleavage ofDNA in post mortemtissue from
ofdifferent human ALS-linked SOD1mutations in patients with ALS or from animal models ofthe dis-
mice83–85 and rats86replicates the clinical and pathologi- ease105,106.Two other apoptotic markers,the LeYantigen
cal hallmarks ofALS (BOX 3),regardless ofwhether the and fractin,are highly expressed in the spinal cord of
free-radical scavenging activity ofSOD1 is increased, people with ALS102and transgenic SOD1mice99,respec-
normal or almost absent83–87.This observation,com- tively,but neither marker has been detected in control
bined with the fact that mutant mice deficient in SOD1 subjects.Likewise,the levels ofthe PCD-related protein
do not develop any motor neuron disease88,indicates Par-4(prostate apoptosis response-4) were increased in
that the cytotoxicity ofmutant SOD1 is a GAIN-OF-FUNCTION the spinal cord of patients with ALS and in mice
GAIN-OF-FUNCTION
effect89.Transfected neuronal cells that express mutant transgenic for mutant SOD1,compared with their
A mutation that confers either a
previously inexistent activity to SOD1 cDNA undergo apoptosis90,as do PC-12 cells respective controls107.
the affected protein or increases transfected with mutant SOD1 (REF.91)and primary The study ofknown molecular mediators ofPCD,
a pre-existing funtion. neurons from transgenic mice that express mutant irrespective ofthe morphology ofthe dying cells,in post
SOD1 (REF.92).These in vitrodata led investigators to mortemALS samples and in mice transgenic for mutant
PARAPTOSIS
consider whether mutant SOD1 kills motor neurons by SOD1 has provided more consistent results.In the lum-
A form ofprogrammed cell
death that is related to apoptosis. activating PCD. However, inhibition of PCD in bar cord ofpatients with ALS and transgenic SOD1mice,
It is transcription dependent and transgenic mice that express mutant SOD1 delays,but the mRNA content ofBcl2is decreased,whereas the
features swelling ofthe does not permanently prevent,neurodegeneration93,94. level of Bax mRNA is increased as compared with
endoplasmic reticulum and
This indicates that the recruitment of PCD in this controls108,109.At the protein level,spinal expression of
mitochondria.However,it does
not depend on caspase experimental model ofALS does not result from a direct Bcl2 and Bcl-x is either unchanged110or decreased98,109,
L
activation,except for caspase 9, effect,but from an indirect effect ofthe mutant protein whereas that ofBax is increased98,103,109 both in patients
lacks internucleosomal DNA on the PCD machinery95.In keeping with this view, and SOD1mice.Because different SOD1mutations do
cleavage,and does not show
mutant SOD1 has the propensity to form intracellular not cause exactly the same neuropathology,it is impor-
other morphological hallmarks
aggregates,the presence of which,in the cytosol of tant to stress that a similar pattern ofchanges ofpro- and
ofapoptosis such as nuclear
fragmentation. motor neurons,might impair microtubule-dependent anti-PCD Bcl2 family members has been found in the
6|MAY 2003 |VOLUME 4 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
Extracellular death signals This observation indicates that cleavage ofBid might
FasL Fas-Fc occur in this ALS model by another mechanism,
perhaps involving caspase 1 (REF.116),the inhibition of
which prolongs the life-span of these animals117.
zVAD-fmk Fas Evidence for a prominent recruitment ofthe mitochon-
Caspase-1-DN Tg drial PCD pathway (that is,release ofcytochrome cfrom
Caspase 1
Minocycline the mitochondria to the cytosol) has been found in the
Bid Caspase 8 IETD spinal cord ofpatients and transgenic SOD1mice112.
Bax
Moreover,pharmacological inhibition ofcytochrome c
Bcl2 Tg tBid
release delays disease onset and extends survival oftrans-
Bcl2 genic SOD1mice118.Activation ofeffector caspases,such
Mitochondria
as caspases 3 and 7,has also been reported in the spinal
cord ofpatients with ALS98and oftransgenic SOD1
Minocycline mice in a time-dependent manner that parallels the pro-
gression of the neurodegenerative process99,100. An
Apaf1 Cyt. c instrumental role for caspases in ALS-related neurode-
Minocycline generation is evidenced by the demonstration that
Caspase 9
zVAD-fmk
zVAD-fmk attenuates mutant SOD1-mediated cell
death in transfected PC-12 cells91and in transgenic
Executioner
caspases SOD1mice94,resulting in a delayed disease onset and
mortality in these animals94.It has also been reported
that mRNA and protein levels ofthe intrinsic caspase
inhibitor XIAP are decreased in the spinal cord ofsymp-
Cell death
tomatic SOD1mice,and that induction ofXIAP in vitro
rescues cells harbouring mutantSOD1 from death by
Figure 3 |Targeting programmed cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.In a inhibiting the activation ofcaspase 3 (REF.119).Activation
transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), initiator caspases activate ofcaspase 8,which mediates the death receptor pathway
downstream effector caspases mainly through the recruitment of the mitochondrial programmed triggered by Fas,has been implicated in ALS in cultured
cell death pathway. Interfering with different molecular elements of this cascade (red boxes), and embryonic motor neurons120.In this study,apoptotic cell
particularly with caspase activation, significantly delays disease onset and mortality in this
death induced by trophic factor deprivation was rescued
experimental model of ALS. Cyt., cytochrome; DN, dominant negative; FasL, Fas ligand;
by Fas-Fc,an antibody fragment that blocks interactions
IETD Ile-Glu-Thr-Asp-fluoromethylketane ; tBid, truncated Bid; Tg, transgenic;
zVAD-fmk, benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone. between Fas and FasL,and by the caspase-8 inhibitor Ile-
Glu-Thr-Asp-fluoromethylketone (IETD-fmk)120.In the
presence ofneurotrophic factors,exogenous Fas activa-
spinal cords ofanother line ofmice transgenic for SOD1 tors such as soluble FasL or anti-Fas antibodies triggered
that harbour a different SOD1mutation111.None of apoptosis ofhalfofthe purified motor neurons that
these alterations,however,are seen in young asympto- were blocked by IETD-fmk120.Motor neurons isolated
matic transgenic mice,but they become progressively from transgenic mice that overexpress different ALS-
more manifest as the neurodegenerative process linked SOD1 mutants showed increased susceptibility to
evolves109.In the spinal cord ofboth patients and affected activation of the Fas-triggered death pathway121.
transgenic SOD1mice,Bax is not only upregulated,but However,in vivo studies in mice transgenic for mutant
it is also mainly expressed in its deleterious homodimeric SOD1indicate that activation ofcaspase 8,like induction
conformation98,109.In mice,Bax is relocated from the ofTNFα (REF.122),occurs in the spinal cord only near
cytosol to the mitochondria98,112.These data indicate end-stages ofthe cell-death process116.This observation
that,in ALS,the finely tuned balance between cell death indicates that the extrinsic PCD pathway in this model
antagonists and agonists is skewed towards death. might make a late contribution to the neurodegenerative
Consistent with this idea,overexpression ofBcl2 miti- process.
gates neurodegeneration in both in vitroand in vivo Together (FIG.3),the data that we have reviewed here
models ofALS91,93 and prolongs survival in transgenic indicate that interfering with PCD delays neuronal
SOD1mice93.As in the MPTP model,Bax upregulation death and prolongs survival in experimental models of
in ALS is associated with p53 activation111,113.However,in ALS.Eventually,these mice die despite the different
contrast to the MPTP model,targeting p53 did not interventions that we have discussed,indicating that tar-
confer any protection against mutant SOD1-mediated geting the PCD cascade can slow the death process but
neurodegeneration114,115. cannot abrogate it.
The pro-PCD protein Bid is expressed in the spinal
cord oftransgenic SOD1mice and is cleaved into its most Targeting PCD in Huntington’s disease
active form during the progression ofthe disease116. Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant
However,whereas cleaved Bid is seen in mice transgenic neurodegenerative disorder characterized by choreic
for mutant SOD1 as early as the beginning ofsymptoms, involuntary movements that result from selective
activated caspase 8, which is known to cleave Bid, neuronal loss in the striatum and the cerebral cortex.
is detected only at the end-stage of the disease116. HD is caused by expansions ofthe trinucleotide CAG in
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |7
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
the huntingtingene,producing a protein containing poly- acid129. Dietary restriction suppresses activation of
glutamine repeats123.Transgenic mice that overexpress a caspase 1,reduces brain atrophy and the formation of
fragment ofhuman huntingtin with an extended poly- huntingtin aggregates,delays disease onset and increases
glutamine region show reduced survival,intraneuronal survival in another transgenic mouse model ofHD,
aggregates and behavioural deficits similar to HD124.Of produced by the expression ofa human amino-terminal
these transgenic mice lines,the R6/2 line has been the truncated huntingtin with 82 polyglutamine repeats
most thoroughly studied.The length ofthe polyglutamine (HD-N171-82Q)130.
repeat is inversely correlated with the age ofdisease onset. Although these findings indicate that caspases might
HD is fatal,with a mean survival after onset of15–20 be valuable targets for therapeutic intervention in HD,
years,and,at present,there is no effective treatment. how mutant huntingtin triggers PCD remains an
Although it is not known how mutant huntingtin enigma. It has been shown131 that expression of
promotes cell death,a self-amplification cascade ofcas- extended polyglutamine repeats in vitro can directly
pase activation has been proposed to participate.In post activate initiator and effector caspases,such as caspases
mortembrain tissue from patients with HD,TUNEL- 3,8 and 9.Moreover,wild-type huntingtin can attenuate
positive cells,the morphology ofwhich is reminiscent of PCD in cultured cells by preventing activation ofcas-
what is found in apoptosis,have been detected in the pase 3 through inhibition ofthe processing and activity
neostriatum125,126.There is also evidence ofthe activa- ofcaspase 9 (REF.132).However,the relationship between
tion ofcaspases 1 and 8 (REFS 127,128) in the brain of expanded polyglutamine repeats and PCD pathways
patients with HD.Activation ofcaspase 1 was assessed seems more complex because,in addition to triggering
by determining the levels of one of its substrates, the activation ofPCD,some polyglutamine-containing
interleukin-1β,and this might therefore reflect an proteins are caspase substrates.It has been shown that
inflammatory response rather than an activation of caspase 3 can cleave wild-type and mutant huntingtin
PCD pathways.Also,it is not clear whether activation proteins in vitro,thereby generating truncated frag-
ofcaspase 1 occurred in neurons or other cell types. ments133–135.Truncated fragments that contain expanded
In experimental models ofHD,there is evidence for polyglutamine repeats show increased toxicity and
the activation ofcaspases 1 and 3 (REF.127).Furthermore, propensity to aggregate,compared with the full-length
administration ofZVAD-fmk127or minocycline68— protein133,134,136.Huntingtin fragments have been identi-
which inhibit caspases 1 and 3 — delays disease progres- fied in the brain ofpeople with HD137–140,but also in
sion and mortality in the R6/2 transgenic mouse model controls,indicating that caspase-mediated cleavage of
ofHD.Expression ofa dominant-negative mutant form wild-type huntingtin might occur as a normal physio-
ofcaspase 1 in R6/2 mice extends survival and delays the logical event.However,it is thought that cleavage of
appearance ofneuronal inclusions,receptor alterations mutant huntingtin would release fragments with the
and the onset of symptoms127.Transgenic mice that potential for increased toxicity and accumulation,owing
express the caspase 1 dominant-negative mutation are to the presence ofthe expanded polyglutamine tract140.
also more resistant to neurotoxins that have been used to Caspase 8 is another caspase that might be involved
model HD, such as malonate and 3-nitropropionic in the pathogenesis ofHD.This caspase is recruited to
Table 1 | In vivoand in vitroapproaches to attenuate neurodegeneration in experimental models by targeting programmed cell death
Disease Experimental model Genetic manipulation Viral vector delivery Pharmacological inhibition
PD MPTP-treated mice Bax KO51 JNK binding domain Pifithrin-α/Z-1-117 (p53)57
of JIP-1 (REF.60) CEP-1347/KT-7515 (JNK)61
Bcl2 Tg52,53 CEP-11004 (JNK)163
p53 KO58 Apaf1 (REF.64) Minocycline (caspases1, 3, cyt. c)69,70
Baculoviral p35 Tg41 XIAP65
Mesencephalic zVAD-fmk/M-920 (REF.66)
dopaminergic zVDVAD-fmk (caspase 2)66
neurons in culture zDEVD-fmk/M-725 (caspase 3)66
zLEHD-fmk (caspase 9)66
ALS Transgenic SOD1mice Bcl2 Tg93 zVAD-fmk94
Caspase 1-DN Tg117 Minocycline (caspase 1, 3, cyt. c)118
Embryonic motor IETD-fmk (caspase 8)120
neurons in culture Fas-Fc (Fas-FasL)120
HD Transgenic R6/2 mice Caspase 1-DN Tg127 zVAD-fmk127
Minocycline
(caspase 1, 3, cyt. c)68
Striatal neurons in culture Wild-type huntingtin transfection132
ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; cyt., cytochrome; DN, dominant-negative; FasL, Fas Ligand; HD, Huntington’s disease; IETD, Ile-Glu-Thr-Asp-fluoromethylketane;
JNK, Jun N-terminal kinase; JIP, JNK interacting protein-1; KO, knockout; MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine; PD, Parkinson’s disease ; SOD1, superoxide
dismutase; Tg, transgenic; XIAP, X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis; zDEVD-fmk, benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp(OMe)-Glu(OMe)-Val-Asp(OMe)-fluoromethylketone;
zLEHD-fmk, benzyloxycarbonyl-Leu-Glu(OMe)-His-Asp(OMe)-fluoromethylketone; zVAD-fmk, benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone;
zVDVAD-fmk, benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Asp-Val-Ala-Asp-fluoromethylketone.
8|MAY 2003 |VOLUME 4 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
intracellular aggregates and is subsequently activated in (TABLE 1).However,although the molecular complexity
neuronal cells that express an expanded polyglutamine ofthe PCD cascade potentially offers many opportuni-
repeat128.In this system,caspase inhibition prevents cell ties for its modulation,such pathways contain few con-
death but not inclusion formation128.Furthermore,acti- ventional drug targets,such as enzymes and receptors.
vated caspase 8 has been detected in the insoluble frac- Therefore,researchers are focusing on other strategies to
tions ofbrains ofpeople with HD but not ofcontrols, affect the components ofthe PCD pathway142.One
further supporting the idea that caspase 8 is recruited to approach is the modulation ofthe expression ofkey
aggregates and subsequently activated128.It has also been molecular components ofthe PCD machinery by gene
proposed that caspase 8 activation in HD is mediated by and antisense therapy,but these technologies still need
the formation ofpro-PCD heterodimers between Hip1 further development.Also,the problem ofwhether
(huntingtin interacting protein 1) and Hippi(Hip1 PCD can be selectively modulated in a specific organ or
protein interactor),which is favoured by the disease- cell type,without adverse effects on others,remains to
associated polyglutamine expansion141.This non-recep- be solved.This issue is especially important in the con-
tor-mediated pathway for activating caspase 8 might text ofchronic processes such as neurodegeneration
trigger PCD through components ofthe extrinsic cell- that would require a sustained anti-PCD treatment.
death pathway and contribute to neuronal death in HD. This problem could eventually be solved by fusing anti-
Together,these data indicate a complex association PCD molecules with other molecules that are tagged to
between expanded polyglutamine reapeat-containing be recognized by tissue-specific receptors or uptake sys-
proteins and caspase activation,indicating that caspases tems (for example,DA transporters).Alternatively,the
might also be a useful target for therapeutic intervention problem could be tackled by synthesizing anti-PCD
in HD. molecules as inactive pro-molecules that would be
enzymatically activated in specific tissues or cell types
Conclusions and perspectives (for example,by tyrosine hydroxylase in DA neurons).
The different studies that we have reviewed here indi- One of the few potential pharmacological
cate that key molecular components of PCD are approaches that could modulate PCD involves
recruited in PD,ALS and HD.Much ofthe data on the inhibitors ofcaspase activity.According to the data that
occurrence ofPCD in these diseases has been obtained we have reviewed here,caspase inhibition might indeed
by studying post mortem human brain samples. delay cell death in different experimental models of
However,the information on the temporal relationship neurodegeneration.However,targeting PCD at such a
between these molecular changes,and their importance downstream point seems insufficient to stop the de-
in the pathologic cascade,emanates largely from the use generative process.Nevertheless,it should be possible to
ofanimal models.Although not all ofthe diseases that combine caspase inhibition with other treatments
we have reviewed show identical PCD changes,two gen- directed at upstream events,as we believe that activation
eral conclusions can be formulated.First,activation of ofPCD in neurodegenerative diseases is not a primary
PCD molecular pathways is a consistent feature ofneu- event.Instead,we think it is a ‘suicide’decision,taken by
rodegeneration.Second,PCD is not the sole mediator of cells that are affected by disease-related abnormalities
cell demise in these disorders,but is a key component such as inflammation,mitochondrial dysfunction,
within a coalition ofdeleterious mechanisms that are oxidative stress,or misfolding and aggregation ofpro-
responsible for the degenerative process. teins.Targeting PCD alone is therefore unlikely to be
The question ofwhether PCD pathways are involved sufficient to obtain a beneficial therapeutic effect.
in the demise ofneurons in neurodegenerative diseases Optimal neuroprotection might require administration
is more than academic,as it has important implications ofa pharmacological cocktail directed against several
for the rational development oftherapeutic strategies pathogenic events.
1. Clarke, P. G. H. Developmental cell death: morphological 9. Przedborski, S., Vila, M. & Jackson-Lewis, V. and-10 in a caspase-9-dependent manner. J. Cell Biol. 144,
diversity and multiple mechanisms. Anat. Embryol. 181, Neurodegeneration: what is it and where are we? J. Clin. 281–292 (1999).
195–213 (1990). Invest.111, 3–10 (2003). 17. Budihardjo, I., Oliver, H., Lutter, M., Luo, X. & Wang, X.
2. Clarke, P. G. H. Cell death and diseases of the nervous 10. Muzio, M., Stockwell, B. R., Stennicke, H. R., Salvesen, G. S. Biochemical pathways of caspase activation during
system (eds Koliatsos, V. E. & Ratan, R. R.) 3–28 (Humana & Dixit, V. M. An induced proximity model for caspase-8 apoptosis. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 269–290 (1999).
Press, New Jersey, 1999). activation. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 2926–2930 (1998). 18. Du, C., Fang, M., Li, Y., Li, L. & Wang, X. Smac, a mitochondrial
3. Sperandio, S., de Belle, I. & Bredesen, D. E. An alternative, 11. Li, P. et al. Cytochrome cand dATP-dependent formation of protein that promotes cytochrome c-dependent caspase
nonapoptotic form of programmed cell death. Proc. Natl Apaf-1/caspase-9 complex initiates an apoptotic protease activation by eliminating IAP inhibition. Cell102, 33–42 (2000).
Acad. Sci. USA97, 14376–14381 (2000). cascade. Cell91, 479–489 (1997). 19. Verhagen, A. M. et al. Identification of DIABLO, a mammalian
4. Kane, D. J., Örd, T., Anton, R. & Bredesen, D. E. Expression 12. Gross, A., McDonnell, J. M. & Korsmeyer, S. J. BCL-2 family protein that promotes apoptosis by binding to and
of bcl-2inhibits necrotic neural cell death. J. Neurosci. Res. members and the mitochondria in apoptosis. Genes Dev. antagonizing IAP proteins. Cell102, 43–53 (2000).
40, 269–275 (1995). 13, 1899–1911 (1999). 20. Chai, J. et al. Structural and biochemical basis of
5. Sloviter, R. S. Apoptosis: a guide for the perplexed. Trends 13. Letai, A. et al. Distinct BH3 domains either sensitize or apoptotic activation by Smac/DIABLO. Nature406,
Pharmacol. Sci. 23, 19–24 (2002). activate mitochondrial apoptosis, serving as prototype 855–862 (2000).
6. Kingsbury, A. E., Mardsen, C. D. & Foster, O. J. cancer therapeutics. Cancer Cell2, 183 (2002). 21. Srinivasula, S. M. et al. Molecular determinants of the
DNA fragmentation in human substantia nigra: 14. Marsden, V. S. et al. Apoptosis initiated by Bcl-2-regulated caspase-promoting activity of Smac/DIABLO and its role in
apoptosis or perimortem effect? Mov. Disord. 13, 877–884 caspase activation independently of the cytochrome c/Apaf- the death receptor pathway. J Biol. Chem. 275,
(1998). 1/caspase-9 apoptosome. Nature419, 634–637 (2002). 36152–36157 (2000).
7. Marx, J. New leads on the ‘how’ of Alzheimer’s. Science 15. Wyss-Coray, T. & Mucke, L. Inflammation in 22. Susin, S. A. et al. Molecular characterization of mitochondrial
293, 2192–2194 (2001). neurodegenerative disease — a double-edged sword. apoptosis-inducing factor. Nature397, 441–446 (1999).
8. Graham, S. H. & Chen, J. Programmed cell death Neuron35, 419–432 (2002). 23. Li, L. Y., Luo, X. & Wang, X. Endonuclease G is an apoptotic
in cerebralischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.21, 16. Slee, E. A. Ordering the cytochrome c-initiated caspase DNase when released from mitochondria. Nature412,
99–109 (2001). cascade: hierarchical activation of caspase-2,-3,-6,-7,-8, 95–99 (2001).
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |9
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
24. Wang, X., Yang, C., Chai, J., Shi, Y. & Xue D. Mechanisms of 1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated mice using terminal 69. Du, Y. et al. Minocycline prevents nigrostriatal dopaminergic
AIF-mediated apoptotic DNA degradation in Caenorhabditis deoxynucleotidyl transferase labelling and acridine orange neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson’s
elegans. Science298, 1587–1592 (2002). staining. Neuroscience 77, 1037–1048 (1997). disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98, 14669–14674 (2001).
25. Nakagawa, T. et al. Caspase-12 mediates endoplasmic- 51. Vila, M. et al. Bax ablation prevents dopaminergic 70. Wu, D. C. et al. Blockade of microglial activation is
reticulum-specific apoptosis and cytotoxicity by amyloid-β. neurodegeneration in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6- neuroprotective in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
Nature403, 98–103 (2000). tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson disease.
26. Morishima, N., Nakanishi, K., Takenouchi, H., Shibata, T. & Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98, 2837–2842 (2001). J. Neurosci. 22, 1763–1771 (2002).
Yasuhiko, Y. An endoplasmic reticulum stress-specific Direct evidence indicating that the pro-PCD protein 71. Polymeropoulos, M. H. et al. Mutation in the α-synuclein gene
caspase cascade in apoptosis. Cytochrome c-independent Bax is essential in MPTP-induced neurodegeneration. identified in families with Parkinson’s disease. Science276,
activation of caspase-9 by caspase-12. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 52. Yang, L. et al. 1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyride 2045–2047 (1997).
34287–34294 (2002). neurotoxicity is attenuated in mice overexpressing Bcl-2. 72. Kruger, R. et al. Ala30Pro mutation in the gene encoding
27. Scorrano, L. et al. BAX and BAK regulation of endoplasmic J. Neurosci. 18, 8145–8152 (1998). α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease. Nature Genet. 18,
reticulum Ca2+: a control point for apoptosis. Science2003 53. Offen, D. et al. Transgenic mice expressing human Bcl-2 in 107–108 (1998).
Mar 6 (DOI 10.1126/science.1081208). their neurons are resistant to 6-hydroxydopamine and 73. Spillantini, M. G. et al. α-Synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature
28. Fahn, S. & Przedborski, S. Merritt’s neurology (ed. Rowland, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine neurotoxicity. 388, 839–840 (1997).
L. P) 679–693 (Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, New York, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA95, 5789–5794 (1998). 74. Vila, M. et al. α-Synuclein up-regulation in substantia nigra
2000). 54. Thornborrow, E. C., Patel, S., Mastropietro, A. E., dopaminergic neurons following administration of the
29. Mochizuki, H., Goto, K., Mori, H. & Mizuno, Y. Histochemical Schwartzfarb, E. M. & Manfredi, J. J. A conserved intronic parkinsonian toxin MPTP. J. Neurochem. 74, 721–729 (2000).
detection of apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol. Sci. response element mediates direct p53-dependent 75. Przedborski, S. et al. Oxidative post-translational
137, 120–123 (1996). transcriptional activation of both the human and murine bax modifications of α-synuclein in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-
30. Anglade, P. et al. Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons genes. Oncogene21, 990–999 (2002). tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model of Parkinson’s
of patients with Parkinson’s disease. Histol. Histopathol. 12, 55. Mandir, A. S. et al. A novel in vivopost-translational disease. J. Neurochem. 76, 637–640 (2001).
25–31 (1997). modification of p53 by PARP-1 in MPTP-induced 76. Dauer, W. et al. Resistance of α-synuclein null mice to the
31. Tatton, N. A., Maclean-Fraser, A., Tatton, W. G., Perl, D. P. & parkinsonism. J. Neurochem. 83, 186–192 (2002). parkinsonian neurotoxin MPTP. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA99,
Olanow, C. W. A fluorescent double-labeling method to detect 56. Mandir, A. S. et al. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase activation 14524–14529 (2002).
and confirm apoptotic nuclei in Parkinson’s disease. Ann. mediates MPTP-induced parkinsonism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 77. El-Agnaf, O. M. et al. Aggregates from mutant and wild-type
Neurol. 44, S142–S148 (1998). USA96, 5774–5779 (1999). α-synuclein proteins and NAC peptide induce apoptotic cell
32. Tompkins, M. M., Basgall, E. J., Zamrini, E. & Hill, W. D. 57. Duan, W. et al. p53 inhibitors preserve dopamine neurons and death in human neuroblastoma cells by formation of β-sheet
Apoptotic-like changes in Lewy-body-associated disorders motor function in experimental parkinsonism. Ann. Neurol. 52, and amyloid-like filaments. FEBS Lett. 440, 71–75 (1998).
and normal aging in substantia nigral neurons. Am. J. Pathol. 597–606 (2002). 78. Hashimoto, M., Takeda, A., Hsu, L. J., Takenouchi, T. &
150, 119–131 (1997). This study demonstrates that intraperitoneal injections Masliah, E. Role of cytochrome cas a stimulator of
33. Kosel, S., Egensperger, R., Von Eitzen, U., Mehraein, P. & of two p53 inhibitors attenuates Bax upregulation, α-synuclein aggregation in Lewy body disease. J. Biol.
Graeber, M. B. On the question of apoptosis in the improves motor function, reduces damage to Chem. 274, 28849–28852 (1999).
parkinsonian substantia nigra. Acta Neuropathol. (Berl.)93, nigrostriatal DA neurons and reduces depletion of DA 79. Kakimura, J. et al. Release and aggregation of cytochrome c
105–108 (1997). and its metabolites in MPTP-treated mice. and α-synuclein are inhibited by the antiparkinsonian drugs,
34. Banati, R. B., Daniel, S. E. & Blunt, S. B. Glial pathology but 58. Trimmer, P. A., Smith, T. S., Jung, A. B. & Bennett, J. P. Jr. talipexole and pramipexole. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 417, 59–67
absence of apoptotic nigral neurons in long-standing Dopamine neurons from transgenic mice with a knockout of (2001).
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 13, 221–227 (1998). the p53 gene resist MPTP neurotoxicity. Neurodegeneration 80. Riederer, P. et al. Transition metals, ferritin, glutathione, and
35. Wullner, U. et al. Cell death and apoptosis regulating proteins 5, 233–239 (1996). ascorbic acid in parkinsonian brains. J. Neurochem. 52,
in Parkinson’s disease — a cautionary note. Acta 59. Saporito, M. S., Thomas, B. A. & Scott, R. W. MPTP activates 515–520 (1989).
Neuropathol. (Berl.)97, 408–412 (1999). c-Jun NH-terminal kinase (JNK) and its upstream regulatory 81. Nicole, A., Santiard-Baron, D. & Ceballos-Picot, I. Direct
2
36. Hartmann, A. et al. Is Bax a mitochondrial mediator in kinase MKK4 in nigrostriatal neurons in vivo. J. Neurochem. evidence for glutathione as mediator of apoptosis in neuronal
apoptotic death of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s 75, 1200–1208 (2000). cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 52, 349–355 (1998).
disease? J. Neurochem. 76, 1785–1793 (2001). 60. Xia, X. G. et al. Gene transfer of the JNK interacting protein-1 82. Rowland, L. P. Merritt’s textbook of neurology (ed. Rowland,
37. Tatton, N. A. Increased caspase 3 and Bax immunoreactivity protects dopaminergic neurons in the MPTP model of L. P.) 742–749 (Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia,
accompany nuclear GAPDH translocation and neuronal Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98, 1995).
apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 166, 29–43 10433–10438 (2001). 83. Gurney, M. E. et al. Motor neuron degeneration in mice that
(2000). Direct evidence of the involvement of the JNK/Jun express a human Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase mutation.
38. Hartmann, A. et al. Caspase-3: a vulnerability factor and final pathway in MPTP-induced apoptotic cell death. Science264, 1772–1775 (1994).
effector in apoptotic death of dopaminergic neurons in 61. Saporito, M. S., Brown, E. M., Miller, M. S. & Carswell, S. 84. Wong, P. C. et al. An adverse property of a familial ALS-linked
Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA97, CEP-1347/KT-7515, an inhibitor of c-junN-terminal kinase SOD1 mutation causes motor neuron disease characterized
2875–2880 (2000). activation, attenuates the 1-methyl-4-phenyl by vacuolar degeneration of mitochondria. Neuron14,
39. Hartmann, A. et al. Increased expression and redistribution of tetrahydropyridine-mediated loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic 1105–1116 (1995).
the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-xin Parkinson’s disease. neurons in vivo. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 288, 421–427 (1999). 85. Bruijn, L. I. et al. ALS-linked SOD1 mutant G85R mediated
L
Neurobiol. Dis. 10, 28–32 (2002). 62. Tournier, C. et al. Requirement of JNK for stress-induced damage to astrocytes and promotes rapidly progressive
40. Hartmann, A. et al. Caspase-8 is an effector in apoptotic activation of the cytochrome c-mediated death pathway. disease with SOD1-containing inclusions. Neuron18,
death of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease, but Science288, 870–874 (2000). 327–338 (1997).
pathway inhibition results in neuronal necrosis. J. Neurosci. 63. Lei, K. et al. The Bax subfamily of Bcl2-related proteins is 86. Nagai, M. et al. Rats expressing human cytosolic copper–zinc
21, 2247–2255 (2001). essential for apoptotic signal transduction by c-Jun N-terminal superoxide dismutase transgenes with amyotrophic lateral
41. Viswanath, V. et al. Caspase-9 activation results in kinase. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 4929–4942 (2002). sclerosis: associated mutations develop motor neuron
downstream caspase-8 activation and bid cleavage in 1- 64. Mochizuki, H. et al. An AAV-derived Apaf-1 dominant negative disease. J. Neurosci. 21, 9246–9254 (2001).
methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced inhibitor prevents MPTP toxicity as antiapoptotic gene therapy 87. Subramaniam, J. R. et al. Mutant SOD1 causes motor neuron
Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 21, 9519–9528 (2001). for Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98, disease independent of copper chaperone-mediated copper
42. Betarbet, R. et al. Chronic systemic pesticide exposure 10918–10923 (2001). loading. Nature Neurosci. 5, 301–307 (2002).
reproduces features of Parkinson’s disease. Nature Neurosci. Using viral vectors to deliver an Apaf1 inhibitor, this 88. Reaume, A. G. et al. Motor neurons in Cu/Zn superoxide
3, 1301–1306 (2000). paper shows the instrumental role of the mitochondrial dismutase-deficient mice develop normally but exhibit
43. Hoglinger, G. U. et al. Chronic systemic complex I inhibition PCD pathway in MPTP-mediated neurodegeneration. enhanced cell death after axonal injury. Nature Genet. 13,
induces a hypokinetic multisystem degeneration in rats. J. 65. Eberhardt, O. et al. Protection by synergistic effects of 43–47 (1996).
Neurochem. 84, 1–12 (2003). adenovirus-mediated X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of 89. Brown, R. H. Jr. Superoxide dismutase in familial amyotrophic
44. Masliah, E. et al. Dopaminergic loss and inclusion body apoptosis and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor gene lateral sclerosis: models for gain of function. Curr. Opin.
formation in α-synuclein mice: implications for transfer in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine Neurobiol. 5, 841–846 (1995).
neurodegenerative disorders. Science287, 1265–1269 model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 20, 9126–9134 90. Rabizadeh, S. et al. Mutations associated with amyotrophic
(2000). (2000). lateral sclerosis convert superoxide dismutase from an
45. van der Putten, H. et al. Neuropathology in mice expressing Evidence indicating that adenoviral gene transfer of antiapoptotic gene to a proapoptotic gene: studies in yeast
human α-synuclein. J. Neurosci. 20, 6021–6029 (2000). XIAP, a protein caspase inhibitor, can prevent cell death and neural cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA92, 3024–3028
46. Feany, M. B. & Bender, W. W. A Drosophilamodel of of DA neurons induced by MPTP, but it does not protect (1995).
Parkinson’s disease. Nature404, 394–398 (2000). against MPTP-induced reduction of striatal 91. Ghadge, G. D. et al. Mutant superoxide dismutase-1-linked
47. Matsuoka, Y. et al. Lack of nigral pathology in transgenic mice cathecolamine concentrations. familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: molecular mechanisms
expressing human α-synuclein driven by the tyrosine 66. Bilsland, J. et al. Caspase inhibitors attenuate 1-methyl-4- of neuronal death and protection. J. Neurosci. 17, 8756–8766
hydroxylase promoter. Neurobiol. Dis. 8, 535–539 (2001). phenylpyridinium toxicity in primary cultures of mesencephalic (1997).
48. Lee, M. K. et al. Human α-synuclein-harboring familial dopaminergic neurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 2637–2649 (2002). 92. Mena, M. A. et al. Effects of wild-type and mutated
Parkinson’s disease-linked Ala-53-Thr mutation causes 67. Raff, M. C., Whitmore, A. V. & Finn, J. T. Axonal self- copper/zinc superoxide dismutase on neuronal survival and
neurodegenerative disease with α-synuclein aggregation in destruction and neurodegeneration. Science296, 868–871 L-DOPA-induced toxicity in postnatal midbrain culture.
transgenic mice PG-8968-73. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA99, (2002). J. Neurochem. 69, 21–33 (1997).
8968–73 (2002). 68. Chen, M. et al. Minocycline inhibits caspase-1 and caspase-3 93. Kostic, V., Jackson-Lewis, V., De Bilbao, F., Dubois-Dauphin, M.
49. Jackson-Lewis, V., Jakowec, M., Burke, R. E. & Przedborski, S. expression and delays mortality in a transgenic mouse model & Przedborski, S. Bcl-2: prolonging life in a transgenic mouse
Time course and morphology of dopaminergicneuronal death of Huntington disease. Nature Med. 6, 797–801 (2000). model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science277,
caused by the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6- Demonstration that inhibition of caspase activation by 559–562 (1997).
tetrahydropyridine. Neurodegeneration4, 257–269 (1995). a second-generation tetracycline derivative delays Demonstration that overexpression of Bcl2 mitigates
50. Tatton, N. A. & Kish, S. J. In situdetection of apoptotic nuclei disease progression and mortality in a transgenic neurodegeneration and prolongs survival in a
in the substantia nigra compacta of 1-methyl-4-phenyl- mouse model of HD. transgenic mouse model of familial ALS.
10|MAY 2003 |VOLUME 4 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

REVIEWS
94. Li, M. et al. Functional role of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in an 118.Zhu, S. et al. Minocycline inhibits cytochrome crelease and 144. Su, J. H., Anderson, A. J., Cummings, B. J. & Cotman, C. W.
ALS transgenic mouse model. Science288, 335–339 (2000). delays progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice. Immunohistochemical evidence for apoptosis in Alzheimer’s
Demonstration that the irreversible broad-caspase Nature417, 74–78 (2002). disease. Neuroreport5, 2529–2533 (1994).
inhibitor zVAD-fmk attenuates mutant SOD1- Demonstration that minocycline prevents 145. Stadelmann, C. et al. Activation of caspase-3 in single
mediated cell death in a transgenic mouse model of mitochondrial release of cytochrome c, resulting in a neurons and autophagic granules of granulovacuolar
ALS, resulting in a delayed disease onset and delayed disease onset and extended survival of degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Evidence for apoptotic
mortality. transgenic ALS mice. cell death. Am. J. Pathol. 155, 1459–1466 (1999).
95. Guegan, C. & Przedborski, S. Programmed cell death in 119. Ishigaki, S. et al. X-Linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein is 146. Selznick, L. A. et al. In situimmunodetection of neuronal
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Clin. Invest.111, 153–161 involved in mutant SOD1- mediated neuronal degeneration. caspase-3 activation in Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol.
(2003). J. Neurochem. 82, 576–584 (2002). Exp. Neurol. 58, 1020–1026 (1999).
96. Cleveland, D. W. & Rothstein, J. D. From Charcot to Lou 120. Raoul, C., Henderson, C. E. & Pettmann, B. Programmed cell 147. Rohn, T. T., Head, E., Nesse, W. H., Cotman, C. W. & Cribbs,
Gehrig: deciphering selective motor neuron death in ALS. death of embryonic motoneurons triggered through the Fas D. H. Activation of caspase-8 in the Alzheimer’s disease brain.
Nature Rev. Neurosci. 2, 806–819 (2001). death receptor. J. Cell Biol. 147, 1049–1062 (1999). Neurobiol. Dis. 8, 1006–1016 (2001).
97. Hirano, A. Aspects of the ultrastructure of amyotrophic lateral 121. Raoul, C. et al. Motoneuron death triggered by a specific 148. Rohn, T. T. et al. Caspase-9 Activation and caspase cleavage
sclerosis. Adv. Neurol. 36, 75–88 (1982). pathway downstream of Fas. Potentiation by ALS-linked of tau in the Alzheimer’s disease brain. Neurobiol. Dis. 11,
98. Martin, L. J. Neuronal death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is SOD1 mutations. Neuron35, 1067–1083 (2002). 341–354 (2002).
apoptosis: possible contribution of a programmed cell death 122. Nguyen, M. D., Julien, J. P. & Rivest, S. Induction of 149. Ivins, K. J., Thornton, P. L., Rohn, T. T. & Cotman, C. W.
mechanism. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 58, 459–471 (1999). proinflammatory molecules in mice with amyotrophic lateral Neuronal apoptosis induced by β-amyloid is mediated by
99. Vukosavic, S. et al. Delaying caspase activation by Bcl-2: a sclerosis: no requirement for proapoptotic interleukin-1βin caspase-8. Neurobiol. Dis. 6, 440–449 (1999).
clue to disease retardation in a transgenic mouse model of neurodegeneration. Ann. Neurol. 50, 630–639 (2001). 150. Giovanni, A. et al. E2F1 mediates death of β-amyloid-treated
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neurosci. 20, 9119–9125 123. Brandt, J. et al. Trinucleotide repeat length and clinical cortical neurons in a manner independent of p53 and
(2000). progression in Huntington’s disease. Neurology46, 527–531 dependent on Bax and caspase 3. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
100. Pasinelli, P., Houseweart, M. K., Brown, R. H. Jr & Cleveland, (1996). 11553–11560 (2000).
D. W. Caspase-1 and -3 are sequentially activated in motor 124. Mangiarini, L. et al. Exon 1 of the HD gene with an expanded 151. Troy, C. M. et al. Caspase-2 mediates neuronal cell death
neuron death in Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase-mediated CAG repeat is sufficient to cause a progressive neurological induced by β-amyloid. J. Neurosci. 20, 1386–1392 (2000).
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. phenotype in transgenic mice. Cell87, 493–506 (1996). 152. Gervais, F. G. et al. Involvement of caspases in proteolytic
USA97, 13901–13906 (2000). 125. Thomas, L. B. et al. DNA end labeling (TUNEL) in Huntington’s cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid-βprecursor protein and
101. Dal Canto, M. C. & Gurney, M. E. Development of central disease and other neuropathological conditions. Exp. Neurol. amyloidogenic Aβpeptide formation. Cell97, 395–406 (1999).
nervous system pathology in a murine transgenic model of 133, 265–272 (1995). 153. Lu, D. C. et al. A second cytotoxic proteolytic peptide derived
human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am. J. Pathol. 145, 126. Portera-Cailliau, C., Hedreen, J. C., Price, D. L. & Koliatsos, V. E. from amyloid-βprotein precursor. Nature Med. 6, 397–404
1271–1279 (1994). Evidence for apoptotic cell death in Huntington disease and (2000).
102. Yoshiyama, Y., Yamada, T., Asanuma, K. & Asahi, T. excitotoxic animal models. J. Neurosci. 15, 3775–3787 154. Langston, J. W., Ballard, P. & Irwin, I. Chronic parkinsonism in
Apoptosis related antigen, LeYand nick-end labeling are (1995). humans due to a product of meperidine-analog synthesis.
positive in spinal motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral 127. Ona, V. O. et al. Inhibition of caspase-1 slows disease Science219, 979–980 (1983).
sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. (Berl.)88, 207–211 (1994). progression in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. 155. Nicklas, W. J., Yougster, S. K., Kindt, M. V. & Heikkila, R. E.
103. Ekegren, T., Grundstrom, E., Lindholm, D. & Aquilonius, S. M. Nature399, 263–267 (1999). MPTP, MPP+and mitochondrial function. Life Sci. 40,
Upregulation of Bax protein and increased DNA degradation 128. Sanchez, I. et al. Caspase-8 is required for cell death induced 721–729 (1987).
in ALS spinal cord motor neurons. Acta Neurol. Scand. 100, by expanded polyglutamine repeats. Neuron22, 623–633 156. Gluck, M. R., Youngster, S. K., Ramsay, R. R., Singer, T. P. &
317–321 (1999). (1999). Nicklas, W. J. Studies on the characterization of the inhibitory
104. Migheli, A., Cavalla, P., Marino, S. & Schiffer, D. A study of 129. Andreassen, O. A. et al. Malonate and 3-nitropropionic acid mechanism of 4’-alkylated 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium and
apoptosis in normal and pathologic nervous tissue after in situ neurotoxicity are reduced in transgenic mice expressing a phenylpyridine analogues in mitochondria and electron
end-labeling of DNA strand breaks. J. Neuropathol. Exp. caspase-1 dominant-negative mutant. J. Neurochem. 75, transport particles. J. Neurochem. 63, 655–661 (1994).
Neurol. 53, 606–616 (1994). 847–852 (2000). 157. Rosen, D. R. et al. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
105. Migheli, A. et al. Lack of apoptosis in mice with ALS. Nature 130. Duan, W. et al. Dietary restriction normalizes glucose gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Med. 5, 966–967 (1999). metabolism and BDNF levels, slows disease progression, and Nature362, 59–62 (1993).
106. He, B. P. & Strong, M. J. Motor neuronal death in sporadic increases survival in huntingtin mutant mice. Proc. Natl Acad. 158. Deng, H.-X. et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is not apoptotic. A Sci. USA100, 2911–2916 (2003). defects in Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase. Science261,
comparative study of ALS and chronic aluminium chloride 131. Miyashita, T. et al. Expression of extended polyglutamine 1047–1051 (1993).
neurotoxicity in New Zealand white rabbits. Neuropathol. sequentially activates initiator and effector caspases. 159. Chiu, A. Y. et al. Age-dependent penetrance of disease in a
Appl. Neurobiol. 26, 150–160 (2000). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 257, 724–730 (1999). transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral
107. Pedersen, W. A., Luo, H., Kruman, I., Kasarskis, E. & Mattson, 132. Rigamonti, D. et al. Huntingtin’s neuroprotective activity sclerosis. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 6, 349–362 (1995).
M. P. The prostate apoptosis response-4 protein participates occurs via inhibition of procaspase-9 processing. J. Biol. 160. Dal Canto, M. C. & Gurney, M. E. Neuropathological changes
in motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Chem. 276, 14545–14548 (2001). in two lines of mice carrying a transgene for mutant human
FASEB J. 14, 913–924 (2000). 133. Goldberg, Y. P. et al. Cleavage of huntingtin by apopain, a Cu, Zn SOD, and in mice overexpressing wild type human
108. Mu, X., He, J., Anderson, D. W., Trojanowski, J. Q. & Springer, proapoptotic cysteine protease, is modulated by the SOD: a model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS).
J. E. Altered expression of bcl-2and baxmRNA in polyglutamine tract. Nature Genet. 13, 442–449 (1996). Brain Res. 676, 25–40 (1995).
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord motor neurons. Ann. 134. Wellington, C. L. et al. Caspase cleavage of gene products 161. Almer, G., Vukosavic, S., Romero, N. & Przedborski, S.
Neurol. 40, 379–386 (1996). associated with triplet expansion disorders generates Inducible nitric oxide synthase upregulation in a transgenic
109. Vukosavic, S., Dubois-Dauphin, M., Romero, N. & truncated fragments containing the polyglutamine tract. mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Przedborski, S. Bax and Bcl-2 interaction in a transgenic J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9158–9167 (1998). J. Neurochem. 72, 2415–2425 (1999).
mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 135. Wellington, C. L. et al. Inhibiting caspase cleavage of 162. Tu, P. H. et al. Transgenic mice carrying a human mutant
J. Neurochem. 73, 2460–2468 (1999). huntingtin reduces toxicity and aggregate formation in superoxide dismutase transgene develop neuronal
110. Troost, D., Aten, J., Morsink, F. & De Jong, J. M. B. V. neuronal and nonneuronal cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275, cytoskeletal pathology resembling human amyotrophic lateral
Apoptosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is not restricted to 19831–19838 (2000). sclerosis lesions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA93, 3155–3160
motor neurons. Bcl-2 expression is increased in unaffected 136. Martindale, D. et al. Length of huntingtin and its polyglutamine (1996).
post- central gyrus. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 21, tract influences localization and frequency of intracellular 163. Teismann, P et al.Cyclooxygenase-2 is instrumental in
498–504 (1995). aggregates. Nature Genet. 18, 150–154 (1998). Parkinson disease neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
111. Gonzalez de Aguilar, J. L. et al. Alteration of the Bcl-x/Bax 137. DiFiglia, M. et al. Huntingtin is a cytoplasmic protein USA(in the press).
ratio in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral associated with vesicles in human and rat brain neurons.
sclerosis: evidence for the implication of the p53 signaling Neuron14, 1075–1081 (1995). Acknowledgements
pathway. Neurobiol. Dis. 7, 406–415 (2000). 138. Kim, Y. J. et al. Caspase 3-cleaved N-terminal fragments of We wish to acknowledge the support from the NIH/NINDS, the US
112. Guegan, C., Vila, M., Rosoklija, G., Hays, A. P. & Przedborski, S. wild-type and mutant huntingtin are present in normal and Department of Defense, the Lowenstein Foundation, the Lillian
Recruitment of the mitochondrial-dependent apoptotic Huntington’s disease brains, associate with membranes, and Goldman Charitable Trust, the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation,
pathway in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neurosci. 21, undergo calpain-dependent proteolysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. the American Parkinson’s Disease Association, the Muscular
6569–6576 (2001). USA98, 12784–12789 (2001). Dystrophy Association, the ALS Association and Project-ALS. We
113. Martin, L. J. p53 is abnormally elevated and active in the CNS 139. Mende-Mueller, L. M., Toneff, T., Hwang, S. R., Chesselet, also thank J.P. Vonsattel for his comments.
of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiol. Dis. M. F. & Hook, V. Y. Tissue-specific proteolysis of Huntingtin
7, 613–622 (2000). (htt) in human brain: evidence of enhanced levels of N- and
114. Prudlo, J. et al. Motor neuron cell death in a mouse model of C-terminal htt fragments in Huntington’s disease striatum. Online links
FALS is not mediated by the p53 cell survival regulator. Brain J. Neurosci. 21, 1830–1837 (2001).
Res. 879, 183–187 (2000). 140. Wellington, C. L. et al. Caspase cleavage of mutant huntingtin DATABASES
115. Kuntz, C., Kinoshita, Y., Beal, M. F., Donehower, L. A. & precedes neurodegeneration in Huntington’s disease. The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Morrison, R. S. Absence of p53: no effect in a transgenic J. Neurosci. 22, 7862–7872 (2002). LocusLink:http://www.ncbi.nlm,nih.gov/locuslink/
mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp. 141. Gervais, F. G. et al. Recruitment and activation of caspase-8 AIF | Apaf1 | Bak | Bax | Bcl | Bcl-x|Bid | Bim | caspase 1 | caspase
L
Neurol. 165, 184–190 (2000). by the Huntingtin-interacting protein Hip-1 and a novel partner 3 | caspase 8 | caspase 9 | caspase 12 | FADD | Fas | Hip1 | Hippi |
116. Guegan, C. et al. Instrumental activation of Bid by caspase-1 Hippi. Nature Cell Biol. 4, 95–105 (2002). huntingtin| JNK | JNK-interacting protein 1 | p53 | Par-4 |
in a transgenic mouse model of ALS. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 20, 142. Nicholson, D. W. From bench to clinic with apoptosis-based Smac/Diablo | SOD1 |α-synuclein | TNFR1 | Tnfα| TRADD| XIAP
553 (2002). therapeutic agents. Nature407, 810–816 (2000). OMIM:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/
117. Friedlander, R. M., Brown, R. H., Gagliardini, V., Wang, J. & 143. Loo, D. T. et al. Apoptosis is induced by β-amyloid in cultured Alzheimer disease | amyotrophic lateral sclerosis | Huntington
Yuan, J. Inhibition of ICE slows ALS in mice. Nature388, 31 central nervous system neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA disease | Parkinson disease
(1997). 90, 7951–7955 (1993). Access to this interactive links box is free online.
NATURE REVIEWS |NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 4 |MAY 2003 |11
© 2003 Nature PublishingGroup

---PAGE BREAK---

