THE VALUE OF EARLY DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE
A literature review of the potential clinical and
socioeconomic impact of targeting unmet needs in
Parkinson’s disease
Michela Tinelli, Panos Kanavos, Federico Grimaccia
November 2016

---PAGE BREAK---

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the European Brain Council for providing the funding that allowed us to
carry out this literature review.
Copyright © Michela Tinelli, Panos Kanavos, Federico Grimaccia 2016
b

---PAGE BREAK---

CONTENTS
CONTENTS .................................................................................................................................. c
PREFACE ...................................................................................................................................... i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................... ii
1. PARKINSON’S DISEASE (PD), ITS MANAGEMENT AND SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT............ 1
1.1. NEUROPATHOLOGY AND SYNTOMS ........................................................ 1
1.2. EPIDEMIOLOGY ....................................................................................... 1
1.3. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS, AND QUALITY OF LIFE ......................... 2
2. UNMET NEEDS .................................................................................................................... 3
1.4. MISSED OR MISDIAGNOSIS ..................................................................... 3
1.5. NON-TREATMENT ................................................................................... 4
1.6. NON-ADHERENCE ................................................................................... 5
1.7. WHY EARLY INTERVENTION AND ADHERENCE ARE IMPORTANT IN PD? ........ 6
1.7.1 EARLY INTERVENTION .............................................................................. 6
1.7.2 ADHERENCE ............................................................................................ 6
3. WHAT INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE IN THE LITERATURE ABOUT EARLY DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT? ............................................................................................................................. 7
3.1. DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS AVAILABLE TO ACHIEVE EARLIER DIAGNOSIS............... 7
3.1.1. NON-MOTOR (OR PRE-MOTOR) SYMPTOMS ............................................. 8
3.1.2. BIOLOGICAL AND GENETIC BIOMARKERS .................................................. 9
3.1.3. NEUROIMAGING TECHNIQUES ................................................................. 9
3.2. THE CLINICAL BENEFITS OF EARLY INTERVENTION ........................................ 10
3.2.1. LEVODOPA (L-DOPA)-BASED REGIMENS ................................................. 14
3.2.2. DOPAMINE AGONISTS............................................................................ 14
3.2.3. MONOAMINE OXIDASE TYPE-B (MAO-B) INHIBITORS .............................. 15
3.2.4. NONPHARMACOLOGICAL THERAPIES ..................................................... 16
3.2.5. MULTIDISCIPLINARY DISEASE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES ...................... 16
3.3. THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF EARLY INTERVENTION .................................... 17
3.3.1. COST OF ILLNESS STUDIES ...................................................................... 17
3.3.2. COST-EFFECTIVENESS STUDIES ............................................................... 20
3.4. THE BENEFITS OF TREATMENT ADHERENCE .................................................... 21
3.4.1. THE CLINICAL BENEFITS ......................................................................... 21
3.4.2. THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS ...................................................................... 22
3.4.3. NEW INTERVENTIONS TO SUPPORT ADHERENCE .................................... 22
4. KEY MESSAGES FROM THE LITERATURE ........................................................................... 24
c

---PAGE BREAK---

5. WHAT HAS NOT BEEN ADDRESSED SO FAR AND SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN FUTURE
RESEARCH? ............................................................................................................................... 25
5.1. RETHINKING WHAT PD IS AND HOW/WHEN IT CAN BE DIAGNOSED .... 25
5.2. DO WE HAVE PREFERRED TREATMENT OPTIONS? ................................ 25
6. REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................... 27
7. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................... 34
TABLE
TABLE: MAIN STUDIES OF CLINICAL BENEFIT OF EARLY TREATMENT OF PD ….11
d

---PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease affecting approximately
7 million people globally, with devastating effects on quality of life and severe socioeconomic
consequences on individuals, their families and society. Worryingly the global prevalence of PD
continues to increase—without any available disease slowing therapy or cure to date, the approved
treatment allows to ameliorate the symptoms patients endure. Therefore, the targeting of unmet
needs in the management of PD grows more crucial, not only to help patients live with their disease,
but also in addressing the increasing socioeconomic burden of the disease and to ensure sustainability
in the treatment of this chronic condition.
This report sheds light on two sides of Parkinson’s disease and its diagnosis: the evidence to support
the need for early, if not prodromal, diagnosis and better symptomatic and preventive treatment, and
the potential clinical and socioeconomic impact of targeting unmet needs. Since misdiagnosed,
delayed or entirely missed identification of PD still occurs in parts of Europe, it is vital to search for
and define a simple, easy to use, widely available and cost-effective diagnostic test. New
developments of diagnostic tools for prodromal and early stage PD are encouraged, and, if
established, should fast be utilised by medical professionals. A growing body of evidence from the
medical literature describes numerous advantages of early symptomatic therapeutic intervention in
PD. Nevertheless, so far clinical trials have failed to convincingly show that presently approved drugs
are able to slow down disease progression. However, there is hope, as efforts in drug development
over the last 20 years – focusing on the etiopathogenesis of PD – provide the first substances with a
disease modifying potential for PD, and these compounds will enter early clinical testing in 2017.
This report takes the forefront position to be used as an important source of information for
healthcare managers, as well as policy and practitioner stakeholders, to highlight the extreme urgency
of early, if not preclinical, diagnosis and treatment of PD. Furthermore, it confirms that early diagnosis
and treatment are paramount to reducing the risk of disease progression, limiting the effects of PD on
quality of life, and potentially lowering long-term treatment costs. Adherence to now available
treatment plans by patients and disease-management strategies by medical practitioners through the
implementation of a chronic model of care is important to improve treatment adherence and rates of
correct diagnosis. Clinicians should be properly informed regarding stringent diagnostic approaches in
order to ensure diagnosis is performed appropriately and accurately.
This study is part of a broader investigation by the European Brain Council (EBC) on the cost of non-
treatment and patient journey analysis, the Value of Treatment project 2015-2017. The project aims
at developing and applying to brain disorders a new integrated care model framework and therefore
promotes a more holistic management of chronic conditions in Europe, including PD. By providing an
extensive review of the case for Parkinson’s disease, the report sheds light on the crucial needs for
the development of improved symptomatic therapy - and even more important – any disease
modifying treatments for PD. This report provides a robust set of data and calls to action for meeting
the ultimate challenge: to find a cure for PD.
Wolfgang H Oertel
Professor of Neurology and Hertie Senior Research Professor
Coordinator of the German Parkinson Study Group and Competence Network Parkinson Germany
Chair of the European Affairs Subcommittee of the European Academy of Neurology
Member of the Board and Treasurer of the European Brain Council
oertelw@med.uni-marburg.de
i

---PAGE BREAK---

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease affecting
approximately 7 million people globally with devastating socioeconomic effects on
individuals, their families and society. Total European costs of PD in 2010 alone accounted for
€13.9 billion. Worryingly the global prevalence of PD is increasing over time and it is expected
to double within the next 20 years (up to 2% in people over the age of 60 and 6% in people
over 80 years). Targeting unmet needs in the management of PD is crucial for addressing
the growing socioeconomic burden of the disease and to ensure sustainability in the
treatment of this chronic condition. The objective of this report is to summarise the key
evidence available from the literature on the potential clinical and socioeconomic impact of
targeting unmet needs in PD.
MISSED OR MISDIAGNOSIS AND DELAYS IN TREATMENT. There is no diagnostically
conclusive test for PD yet, so the diagnosis is clinical in nature. In the clinical setting, PD is
commonly missed or misdiagnosed since many symptoms of PD are also common to other
diseases both neurodegenerative and non-neurodegenerative. The diagnosis and treatment
of PD typically occurs when the disease has already progressed to a relatively advanced stage
in which motor symptoms are clearly evident and substantial neurophysiological damage has
already taken place. At this point, any possibility of delaying disease progression or, achieving
neuroprotection may already be out of reach.
 New developments in early diagnosis and treatment. A revised definition of PD, together
with the availability of novel diagnostic tools can allow for earlier diagnosis, and therefore
treatment. Non-motor symptoms, which account for a large proportion of PD symptoms
and usually emerge much earlier, are increasingly recognized as useful indicators to
achieve earlier diagnosis. Furthermore, a number of new and diverse diagnostic tools (i.e.
biological and genetic biomarkers, imaging techniques) are now available and have the
potential to make earlier diagnosis, and consequently earlier treatment, possible.
 The benefits of early diagnosis and treatment. A growing body of evidence from the
medical literature describes numerous advantages that may be associated with early
therapeutic intervention in PD. The most evident benefit of early treatment with
medicines other than L-dopa is the reduction in symptoms (for example difficulty or
distortion in performing voluntary movements) and the delay of levodopa (L-dopa)
initiation and therefore its immediate side-effects (for example hypotension, arrhythmia,
insomnia and hallucinations) and the effects of its chronic administration (motor
complications and drug resistance). Clinical trials also suggest that early treatment can
slow disease progression.
Both the decrease of symptoms and the potential for slowing disease progression, have a
major impact on improving patient quality of life (QoL) and reducing the costs associated
ii

---PAGE BREAK---

with PD in the long run, as the great majority of costs attributable to PD occur when the
disease is at its most advanced stage and when symptoms are most severe.
Despite this apparent benefit of utilizing dopamine agonists in early PD to delay the need
for L-dopa and to achieve cost savings, there is still controversy regarding when to
initiate treatment. If with early treatment we consider the disease being treated soon
after standard PD diagnosis has been achieved there is economic evidence to
demonstrate that treatments (other than L-dopa) can be cost-effective. If early PD is
defined as that period prior to the onset of significant motor symptoms, then, as
considered with clinical outcomes, few data are available on the real potential for cost
savings.
NON-ADHERENCE. Non-adherence is common, critical, and costly in PD. It presents serious
socio-economic consequences and well-being deterioration not only for the patients but also
for family members. PD patients in general have poor adherence to prescribed therapies,
especially therapies with complex dosing schedules.
 The benefit of more convenient and adherence-friendly drug formulations, regimen
simplification, mailed and telephoned reminders or reinforcement, counselling, and
supportive care may further help to improve outcomes and lower costs in PD.
 A series of studies in the USA reported that increased medication adherence can result in
significant savings in direct costs related to hospitalisations, visits and medicines.
FUTURE RESEARCH DEVELOPMENTS
 Rethinking what PD is and how/when it can be diagnosed. The recent developments in
PD diagnosis emphasise the necessity of rethinking what PD is and how, and when, it can
be diagnosed. Clinicians are aware that the current diagnostic tools and guidance should
be updated in light of current knowledge of PD to optimize its early detection.
 If early PD is defined as that period prior to the onset of significant motor symptoms,
before substantial neurological damage may have occurred, then more research would
be needed to explore the real impact of early treatment both on clinical and economic
outcomes.
 The benefit of alternative approaches (such as integrated care models) should be further
explored as opportunities to improve outcomes and lower costs in PD. The EBC Value of
Treatment project for 2015-2017 aims at developing and applying to brain disorders a
new integrated care model framework and therefore promote a more holistic
management of chronic conditions in Europe. The project will provide policy
recommendations on how to implement effective and cost-effective interventions for
brain disorders across different European health systems and specific case studies,
including Parkinson’s disease.
iii

---PAGE BREAK---

1. PARKINSON’S DISEASE (PD), ITS MANAGEMENT AND
SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACT
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder that causes
significant disability and reduces quality of life (QoL), with significant impact on costs to the
healthcare system and society as a whole.
1.1. NEUROPATHOLOGY AND SYNTOMS
The two major findings when studying the nervous system tissue of individuals with Parkinson
disease are loss of neuronal cell and the presence of Lewy bodies (abnormal aggregates of
protein that develop inside nerve cells) in the mid brain (substantia nigra, that plays an
important role in reward, addiction, and movement). 1,2 Both the cause and cure for PD are
yet unknown. PD's symptoms are caused by a decrease in the levels of the chemical
messenger dopamine, which allows messages to be sent to the parts of the brain that co-
ordinate movement, due to the death of dopamine-producing nerve cells. With the loss of
dopamine-producing nerve cells, these parts of the brain are unable to function normally,
causing the symptoms of PD's to appear. These symptoms include tremor, slowed movement,
rigid muscles, impaired posture and balance, loss of automatic movements, along with
changes in speech and writing (see below).
1.2. EPIDEMIOLOGY
The European Brain Council (EBC) published a study on brain disorders and their epidemiology
in 2005.3 There are around 466 million people in Europe, 127 million (27%) of whom have
brain disorders (both neurological and general mental health). If those with co-morbidities
are excluded, that still leaves 104 million people (22%), roughly half of whom (51.2 million
people; 11%) have a neurological condition. The number with PD is estimated to be around
1.1 million (0.2%).4 In 2010 the overall European estimates increased this number to 1.25
million cases of PD5.
PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer’s disease (6)
affecting approximately 7 million people globally and is a major and increasing burden on
patients, families, carers and healthcare systems.7 A recent meta-analysis of the worldwide
data showed a rising prevalence of PD with age (all per 100,000): 41 in 40 to 49 years; 107 in
50 to 59 years; 173 in 55 to 64 years; 428 in 60 to 69 years; 425 in 65 to 74 years; 1087 in 70
to 79 years; and 1903 in older than age 80.8
The prevalence of PD in industrialised countries, although the exact prevalence is difficult to
accurately determine, is thought to be approximately 0.3%.9 This rises to 1% in people over
1

---PAGE BREAK---

the age of 60 and 3% in people over 80 years.6 Country specific evidence is reported
elsewhere (UK10, Spain11, USA12 international comparison13).
Due to the ageing of the population, with a greater proportion of the population aged 65 and
older, and due to the positive correlation between prevalence and age, PD is likely to become
more prevalent in the next years and is expected to double within the next 20 years . The rise
in prevalence brings substantial concerns with respect to the growing socioeconomic burden
and sustainability of this chronic condition.
1.3. SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS, AND QUALITY OF LIFE
Cost of illness escalates as PD progresses, placing an economic burden on the healthcare
system, society and patients themselves. According to the EBC data for 2004, annual spend in
Europe on PD was €10.7 billion, consisting of €4.6 billion on healthcare costs and €6.1 billion
on direct non-medical costs. This is more than 12% of the total spend on neurological diseases
in Europe, which was €83.9 billion. In 2010 the total European cost of PD increased to €13.9
billion (30% more compared with previous estimates in 2004)5. DALY estimates (age15+) for
the EU-27 population in 2010 is 174,0378.14 In USA Kowal and colleagues15 showed that the
national economic burden of PD exceeds US$14.4 billion [€12.2 billion] in 2010
(approximately US$22,800 [€20,296] per patient). The population with PD incurred medical
expenses of approximately US$14 billion [€12 billion] in 2010, US$8.1 billion [€7.21 billion]
higher (US$12,800 [€11,393] per capita) than expected for a similar population without PD.
Indirect costs (e.g., reduced employment) are conservatively estimated at US$6.3 billion [€5.6
billion] (or close to US$10,000 [€8,901] per person with PD).
Despite the progressive decline and comorbidity associated with PD, the lifespan of affected
individuals, treated with innovative drug therapy, does not differ greatly from age matched
individuals without PD.16 As a result, people may live up to 20 or more years with PD. This
finding has serious implications for the cost of treating PD over the individual’s lifetime and
suggests that the financial burden will escalate over time. In addition, the economic burden
is likely to increase further as the proportion of individuals in Western societies aged over 65
increases.17
PD does not directly cause people to die and for the majority of people does not significantly
affect their life expectancy even though some of the more advanced symptoms can lead to
increased disability and poor health, which can make someone more vulnerable to infection.
Despite little impact on life expectancy, PD patients experience progressive disability and
reduced QoL at all stages of the disease and at all ages. Several studies indicate that QoL is
affected not only by the motor symptoms of PD, but also by the pre-motor symptoms such as
depression and cognitive state (for examples see 18,19,20).
2

---PAGE BREAK---

 Impairments in motor function such as tremor, slowed movements, loss of voluntary
movements, muscular rigidity and postural instability cause problems with mobility
and interfere with activities of daily living. Problems with balance and gait (rhythmic
stepping movements for travel) can lead to falls and injuries, and the inability to
perform everyday tasks. Other symptoms include poor hand co-ordination, problems
with handwriting, and a sensation of tremor (shaking) in the arm.
 Early PD's symptoms often include pre-motor symptoms such as depression,
dementia, feeling tired and weak, reduced ability to smell and to detect odours, acting
out vivid dreams during sleep (REM sleep behaviour disorder), along with problems
with blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, and digestion of food. Visual symptoms
often precede the clinical diagnosis and increase over time.12 Symptoms vary greatly
from person to person and can sometimes take years to progress to a point where
they cause problems.
2. UNMET NEEDS
1.4. MISSED OR MISDIAGNOSIS
PD is challenging to diagnose, since there are no well-established biomarkers to determine if
the disease is present.21 There is no diagnostically conclusive test for PD, so the diagnosis is
clinical in nature and is made by identification of slowness of movements (bradykinesia) and
at least one of the following symptoms: resting tremor, muscle rigidity, and postural
instability.22 Confirmation of a PD diagnosis also involves exclusion of other disease and
presence of at least three positive criteria, which include: affecting one side of the body,
shaking of the limb when the person is at rest (resting tremor), progressive disorder,
persistent asymmetry affecting side of onset most prominently, excellent response to
levodopa (L-dopa), severe involuntary movements affecting especially the shoulders, hips,
and face induced by L-dopa, L-dopa response for 5 years or more, or clinical course of 10 years
or more.22,23 Current diagnostic modalities in PD are limited by the fact that they identify
PD by the presence of motor symptoms; by this point, around 70% of all dopamine neurons
may have been lost24. Thus, the diagnosis of PD remains a challenge for clinicians,
particularly in the pre-clinical, or early phase, before the motor symptoms appear. Despite
pre-motor symptoms preceding the clinical diagnosis, none of these are sufficiently specific
to be used as stand-alone biomarkers, thereby preventing the achievement of an early
diagnosis.
PD, in the clinical setting, is commonly missed or misdiagnosed. Many symptoms of PD are
also common to a range of conditions, and this may cause missed or misdiagnosis of PD. These
3

---PAGE BREAK---

conditions can be grouped as neurodegenerative, which primarily affect the neurons in the
human brain, non-neurodegenerative, which do not affect the human brain. Among the
neurodegenerative diseases, those most often confused with PD are multiple system atrophy
(MSA; this cell degeneration causes problems with movement, balance, and autonomic
functions of the body such as bladder control or blood-pressure regulation), progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP; uncommon brain disorder that affects movement, control of walking
(gait) and balance, speech, swallowing, vision, mood and behaviour, and thinking),
corticobasal degeneration (CBD; it is a rare condition that can cause gradually worsening
problems with movement, speech, memory and swallowing), dementia with Lewy bodies
(DLB; it is a type of progressive dementia that leads to a decline in thinking, reasoning and
independent function because of abnormal microscopic deposits that damage brain cells over
time), normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH; is an accumulation of fluid in the brain that
causes the ventricles in the brain to become enlarged), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD; it implies
a progressive mental deterioration associated with gradual death of brain cells).25,26 Essential
tremor (ET; that is a type of uncontrollable shake or tremble of part of the body) is also a
common source of confusion in PD diagnosis, although many of these patients will go on to
develop PD.27 Furthermore people can develop DP symptoms following treatment with
particular medications (drug-induced Parkinsonism); this form is very common and may
constitute the second-most common cause of Parkinsonism.28
The probability of misdiagnosis appears to be strongly related to whom is doing the
diagnosing and whether or not the clinician is applying diagnostic criteria from clinical
guidelines, although application of the clinical criteria is not a guarantee of diagnostic
accuracy. There is evidence showing that nearly half (47%) of PD diagnoses are incorrect when
performed in the primary care setting, and specialists whose expertise is not specific
movement disorders have an error rate of approximately 25%, while movement disorder
specialists are mistaken in only 6% to 8% of cases.10
1.5. NON-TREATMENT
Since there is currently no cure for PD, the main treatment goal is to manage the symptoms
and there are several medicines available for the management of its symptoms. Although
medicines can improve QoL29, there is a significant decline in physical mobility, pain, social
isolation and emotional reactions as the disease progresses.25 Patients with PD who remain
untreated, or inappropriately treated, will experience ongoing and substantial symptomatic
deterioration and negative effects on their QoL.30 In a recent survey 1,400 patients with
essential tremor (including PD) identified a broad range of unmet needs that they felt were
not addressed in their treatment31. The most reported issues related to what they felt was
inappropriate treatment included:
 Lack of psychological services and support (33.9%);
 Lack of physical or occupational therapy (28.6%);
4

---PAGE BREAK---

 Lack of support in handling embarrassment and social effects of tremor (15.8%);
 Feelings of not being in control (13.7%);
 Lack of detailed report and a more quantitative way of assessing tremor and tracking
progression (12.7%);
 Lack of information about current treatment and medications (11.9%);
 Lack of empathy, compassion and a feeling of being heard (11.6%),
 Lack of alternative treatment approaches other than just medications and surgery
(11.2%);
 Lack of discussion of all symptoms aside from tremor (e.g., cognition, balance; less
than 10%).
1.6. NON-ADHERENCE
Medication non-adherence is prevalent in Parkinson's disease (PD) and results in substantial
motor dysfunction. Leopold and colleagues (2004)32 showed that only 10% of PD patients fully
adhered to treatment. A further study identified that 20% of patients with PD were under
users of anti-parkinsonian medication.33 In addition, patients who satisfactorily adhered to
medication (average total pill taking > 80%) all showed substantial problems with dose timing
adherence (number of doses taken at the correct time interval). Kulkarni and colleagues
(2008) conducted a retrospective longitudinal cohort study in people with PD and found the
prevalence of sub-optimal adherence to be 67%.34
Medication non-adherence is therefore a significant problem in people with PD and it can be
related to several factors, including35:
 Polypharmacy is very common with over half of patients taking at least two anti-
parkinsonian medicines in addition to multiple prescriptions for non-motor
manifestations and other comorbidities. Furthermore, dopaminergic medicines are
often taken 3–4 times daily, with advanced PD patients taking as many as 6–10 doses
per day. Greater regimen complexity is strongly correlated with non-adherence in
PD.36,37
 Depression and mood disorders have been identified as an independent risk factor for
non-adherence and a common non-motor manifestation of PD. Studies in depressed
populations have found a threefold increase in non-adherence with all prescribed
medications38 and a single-centre study found non-adherence was associated with
worse depression and poorer quality of life in PD.39
 Deficits in the management (regulation, control) of cognitive processes, including
working memory, reasoning, flexibility, and problem solving as well as planning and
execution is another common feature of PD and contributor to non-adherence. These
5

---PAGE BREAK---

deficits are common in PD and have been independently associated with medication
non-adherence.40
 Additional factors associated with non-adherence include poor quality of life and
symptoms control, poor knowledge of PD, lack of social support/partner39, non-
modifiable demographic and educational factors41 low health literacy42, low income,
maintaining employment, and the cost of medications.43
Consequences of non-adherence include worse disease control, with diminished mobility,
greater movement problems, involuntary muscle movements, diminished voluntary
movements and worsening quality of life. Non-adherent individuals are more likely to report
being undertreated, rather than recognising that their sub optimally controlled symptoms
may be caused by their non-adherence to treatment. Similarly the healthcare provider may
react increasing the medication doses or frequencies, changing the medicine regimens, or
questioning the diagnosis, leading to additional diagnostic testing, patient stress, and further
non-adherence.44
1.7. WHY EARLY INTERVENTION AND ADHERENCE ARE IMPORTANT IN PD?
1.7.1 EARLY INTERVENTION
There is growing evidence that early intervention may help in preserving the functioning of
the neurons, reducing symptoms, particularly difficulty or distortion in performing voluntary
movements, slowing disease progression, improving patient QoL and, in turn, reducing the
overall costs associated with PD45. However early treatment relies on early diagnosis and, as
already pointed out, early diagnosis and treatment of PD can be difficult to achieve because
the nature of diagnosis (mostly clinical). Therefore by the time motor symptoms emerge,
significant neurological damage and the destructive structural changes have already taken
place. PD diagnosis by conventional means identifies a disease which is already advanced, and
any possibility of delaying disease progression, not to mention neuroprotection, may already
be out of reach. Despite the fact that diagnosis remains mainly clinical, recently, the
increasing recognition of pre-motor symptoms together with a number of new and diverse
techniques for diagnosis have the potential to considerably alter the diagnostic landscape in
the next future, making the early diagnosis, and therefore treatment, achievable.46
1.7.2 ADHERENCE
Poor treatment adherence is a significant challenge to optimizing outcomes in PD, and any
therapeutic strategy must take into consideration those factors impacting treatment
adherence.
In PD pharmacological management is essential for managing symptoms and maximising QoL;
therefore medication adherence is paramount to securing effective treatment.47 This is
6

---PAGE BREAK---

especially relevant as motor function becomes progressively worse, requiring increasingly
intricate medication regimes to manage symptoms.48 Furthermore, as non-motor symptoms
have been reported by patients and carers to be more negatively impactful than motor
complaints in PD49,50, adequately adhering to prescribed regimens is likely to be important for
maximising health related QoL.
Fargel et al surveyed 500 patients with PD and 592 neurologists who treated patients with
PD, in order to determine the causes of poor adherence.51 The authors found that while
physicians described themselves as being satisfied with the “pill load” of prescribed
medications for their patients, the PD patients themselves were largely dissatisfied and
wished for simpler medicine regimens as follow:
 A reduction in daily tablet intake was the most common request for treatment
improvement;
 Moreover, patients expressed their preferences for alternative delivery systems,
most of all transdermal patches, to facilitate the ease of delivery of their PD treatment
(and this was reported also by the neurologists).
These results are consistent with a recently international study (2014) comparing patient
preference for pramipexole in once daily versus 3-times-daily formulations in patients with
either early or advanced PD; the majority of the patients (94.4%) reported their preference
for the once-daily formulation.52 In another from Spain (2012) it was reported as follow:
 Strong correlation between treatment adherence to L-dopa and the total number of
daily medicines (as opposed to pills) prescribed;
 Poorer adherence associated with higher L-dopa doses;
 Higher rates of adherence in patients who were treated first with a dopamine agonist
versus those first treated with L-dopa.53
A transdermal patch of the dopamine agonist rotigotine, which has shown safety and efficacy
in early PD and non-inferiority to pramipexole, was recently approved for PD treatment by
the FDA, and offers a therapy that is likely to be associated with higher rates of adherence
compared with oral therapies.54
3. WHAT INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE IN THE LITERATURE ABOUT
EARLY DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT?
3.1. DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS AVAILABLE TO ACHIEVE EARLIER DIAGNOSIS
Among the diagnostic tools which might help in achieving earlier diagnosis there are: non-
motor (or pre-motor) symptoms, biomarkers (biological and genetic) and neuroimaging
techniques.
7

---PAGE BREAK---

3.1.1. NON-MOTOR (OR PRE-MOTOR) SYMPTOMS
Although motor symptoms are the most recognizable of symptoms in PD, and are those upon
which a PD diagnosis is largely based on, non-motor symptoms represent not only a large
proportion of overall PD symptoms but, in many cases, emerge earlier than motor
symptoms. The non-motor symptoms could be present for up to 10 years before the diagnosis
is made and have been shown to exert a greater negative influence on QoL than motor
symptoms.55,56 Thus, despite the fact that the standard diagnosis of PD still relies on motor
symptoms, pre-motor symptoms hold promise for the early diagnosis of PD, and considerable
progress has been made in recent years in establishing pre-motor symptoms as a means of
identifying PD much earlier than in the past. One important observation is that PD is not
simply a central nervous system (CNS) disease in which the peripheral nervous system (PNS)
plays a minor part. Rather, PNS seems to play a much larger role than previously assumed,
particularly in the early stages of the disease.57 Many of the pre-motor symptoms that arise
in early PD emerge in PNS structures, and there is compelling evidence suggesting that PD
actually begins in the PNS.58,59
The manifestations of pre-motor symptoms in PD are diverse, affecting sensing smell,
gastrointestinal and urinary function, mood and sleep, as well as a variety of cerebral activities
(reasoning, memory, attention, and language and lead directly to the attainment of
information and, thus, knowledge).
 Dysfunctions of the stomach and the intestines that manifest as pre-motor symptoms
include gastroparesis (a disorder that slows or stops the movement of food from the
stomach to the small intestine) and constipation (bowel movements are difficult or
happen less often than normal). In this regard, the presence of Lewy bodies in the
gastrointestinal tract may provide a means for early diagnosis of PD.60
 Urinary dysfunctions- Urinary frequency, urgency, and nocturia (condition in which
you wake up during the night because you have to urinate) constitute urinary
dysfunctions in early PD.
 Sexual dysfunction in both men (erectile and ejaculation dysfunction) and women
(poor vaginal lubrication and difficulty achieving orgasm) have also been observed as
PD pre-motor symptoms.
 Mood disorders, including depression and anxiety, are well documented in the pre-
motor phase, while sleep disturbances, including REM behaviour disorder (acting out
vivid dreams as they sleep) and excessive daytime sleepiness, are common premotor
symptoms.
 Other non-motor PD symptoms that may play a role in the premotor phase include
pain, apathy (lack of feeling), attention/memory problems, restless legs syndrome
(RLS; it is a neurological disorder characterized by an irresistible urge to move one's
8

---PAGE BREAK---

body to stop uncomfortable or odd sensations), fatigue, and poor ability to
discriminate colours.59
 Hyposmia (reduced ability to smell and to detect odours),61 may be the most notable
of non-motor symptoms observed in the pre-motor stage, in part because of the
growing quantity of data demonstrating and explicating the role of smell loss in PD,
but also because it may represent a highly useful means of achieving diagnosis of PD
much earlier than has been possible up until the present.57 The results of several
studies investigating the smell function in PD have been encouraging in considering
smell testing as a means of early PD detection either alone62-64 or in combination with
neuroimaging techniques.64,65 However, hyposmia is also associated with other
conditions, including Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, and thus
the presence of hyposmia may be useful for the identification of persons at risk for
PD, rather than being conclusively diagnostic of PD.66
3.1.2. BIOLOGICAL AND GENETIC BIOMARKERS
Several different biological indicators (biomarkers) in body fluids such as the brain and spine
fluid (cerebrospinal fluid; CSF) as well as the blood and urine, have been proposed for use in
the diagnosis of PD. Challenges to the use of biomarkers revolve around the fact that changes
over the course of the disease can affect their measurable levels, and even their presence.
Moreover, the manifestations of biomarkers in other diseases characterised by reduction or
impairment of cognitive function may be too similar to those seen in PD to allow them to be
easily identified.21 It is common understanding that a combination of several biomarkers
will be required to achieve reliable early PD diagnosis.67 In addition to biological biomarkers,
recent research into genetic biomarkers for early PD have also shown promising results.68,69
3.1.3. NEUROIMAGING TECHNIQUES
Several neuroimaging approaches (various techniques to either directly or indirectly image
the structure, function/pharmacology of the nervous system) have demonstrated viability in
the detection of PD and are therefore used as an additional tool in the examination of the
brain in order to make a diagnosis of brain diseases. A few neuroimaging techniques are
currently available and they include single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT),
transcranial sonography (TCS), positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI).70 Unfortunately, they have significant limitations:
 SPECT is more accessible to clinicians than PET and less expensive; however it cannot
differentiate PD from other disorders such as multisystem atrophy (MSA; it is
associated with the degeneration of nerve cells in specific areas of the brain and can
leads to premature death), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; a rare and
progressive condition that can cause problems with balance, speech, swallowing,
9

---PAGE BREAK---

vision, mood and behaviour, and thinking), and corticobasal degeneration (CBD; it is
a rare condition that can cause gradually worsening problems with movement,
speech, memory and swallowing).
 TCS is also more accessible and less expensive than PET and it has been proven to be
a useful technique in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of movement disorders.21
 MRI provides excellent resolution and diagnostic sensitivity and can facilitate the
diagnosis of neurodegenerative conditions. Structural imaging with MRI is an
alternative to SPECT, TCS and PET and particularly for patients with clinical features
that are atypical for PD; however its utility as a diagnostic tool is not widely accepted.71
In vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) is an additional tool that can be used to
complement the more common MRI in the characterization of tissue. MRS can provide a
useful and objective tool for detection of metabolic changes of the brain in patients with PD
and has been shown to meet many of the criteria of an ideal imaging biomarker. Indeed, MRS
has good consistency (test-retest reliability) and, compared with PET and SPECT, is non-
invasive and cheap, and it does not require contrast agents for the molecular imaging
reducing exposure to radioactive substances. In addition, compared with some in vitro
molecular biomarkers that require a complex analysis, MRS is not restricted to specialized
centres to perform the analysis, making its extension to general public health centres
possible. The recent technical advances of MRS allowed achieving in vivo detailed information
on pathophysiology of PD. Several studies demonstrated the usefulness of MRS to achieve
a differential diagnosis of PD versus other forms of Parkinsonism, especially in early stages
of disease in which signs and symptoms of different forms of Parkinsonism have greater
overlap.
All these neuroimaging techniques, in addition to offering a valuable tool to make earlier
diagnosis of PD, could be also used to monitor disease progression. However, the utility of
these modalities as biomarkers for evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic interventions to slow
disease progression remains imperfect, and additional investigations are needed before being
able to introduce them into clinical practice.45
3.2. THE CLINICAL BENEFITS OF EARLY INTERVENTION
Several studies have been undertaken to assess the clinical benefit of early treatment of PD
with levodopa (L-dopa)72,73, dopamine agonists74-78 and Monoamine Oxidase Type-B (MAO-
B) inhibitors79-84 (Table). The majority of the studies evaluating the benefit of early treatment
refer to studies investigating the clinical efficacy of a PD medicine (i.e. L-dopa or dopamine
agonist or MAO-B inhibitor) in the early stages of the disease without directly comparing early
vs. delayed treatment.72-81 Only a few studies allow for such a comparison.82-84 Details on the
different studies are reported in the table below.
10

---PAGE BREAK---

Table. Main studies of clinical benefit of early treatment of PD
Study Type of study Publication Intervention Comparator N Follow-up Main outcome
year
L-dopa
ELLDOPA72 Clinical trial 2004 Carbidopa-L-dopa Matched placebo 361 42 weeks L-dopa improved UPDRS score*
at various doses in a dose-related fashion
SPECT [123I] Clinical Trial 2004 Carbidopa-L-dopa Matched placebo 116 42 weeks SPECT demonstrated that L-
β-CIT uptake at various doses dopa accelerates the loss of
sub-study72 nigrostriatal dopamine nerve
terminals
STRIDE-PD73 Clinical Trial 2010 Carbidopa-L-dopa Carbidopa-L-dopa 747 134 weeks Intervention group had shorter
plus entacapone time to dyskinesia onset and
increased frequency of dyskinesia
Dopamine agonists
Rascol et al74 Clinical Trial 2000 Ropinirole Benserazide-L- 268 5 years Intervention had longer time to
dopa dyskinesia; no significant
difference in the mean change in
UPDRS activities of daily living
subscale scores between the two
groups
CALM-PD-CIT Clinical Trial 2002 Pramipexole Carbidopa-L-dopa 82 46 months SPECT showed less
77 dopamine neuron degeneration
with pramipexole; UPDRS scores
similar in both groups
REAL-PET75 Clinical Trial 2003 Ropinirole Carbidopa-L-dopa 186 2 years PET showed slower disease
progression with ropinirole.
However, better UPDRS motor
score improvement with L-dopa.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

Study Type of study Publication Intervention Comparator N Follow-up Main outcome
year
CALM-PD76 Clinical Trial 2005 Pramipexole Placebo-L-dopa 301 48 months Reduction in dyskinesia and
or carbidopa-L- wearing-off with pramipexole,
dopa but better total score and motor
score and lower incidences of
side effect (i.e. freezing,
somnolence, and edema) in the
L-dopa group
Stowe et al78 Meta- 2008 Dopamine L-dopa 5247 n.a. Less motor complications (i.e.
analysis agonists dyskinesia, dystonia)
with dopamine
agonists compared to L-dopa, but
more side-effects and poorer
symptom control
PD MED trial85 Clinical Trial 2014 L-dopa dopamine 1620 36 months L-dopa provides better mobility
agonists (DA) and and a higher quality of life than
monoamine the two main alternatives,
oxidase type B dopamine agonists (DA) and
inhibitors monoamine oxidase type B
(MAOBI) inhibitors (MAOBI)
MAO-B inhibitors
DATATOP80 Clinical Trial 1993 Selegiline and/or Placebo 800 24 months Selegiline delayed the onset
tocopherol of disability requiring L-dopa
therapy and the decline in UPDRS
total score compared with
placebo or tocopherol
TEMPO81 Clinical Trial 2002 Rasagiline Placebo 404 26 weeks Rasagiline improved UPDRS
scores; no difference in the
frequency of adverse events
12

---PAGE BREAK---

Study Type of study Publication Intervention Comparator N Follow-up Main outcome
year
Ives et al79 Meta- 2008 MAO-B inhibitor Placebo or L-dopa 3525 n.a. Better total UPDRS scores, UPDRS
analysis motor scores and activities of
daily living scores with MAO-B
inhibitor
ADAGIO82 Clinical Trial 2009 Rasagiline 1 mg or Placebo for the 1176 72 weeks Improved UPDRS scores in the
2 mg daily for 72 first 36 weeks, early-start group compared to
weeks then rasagiline 1 delayed-start group, with
mg or 2 mg daily rasagiline 1 mg but not with 2 mg
for the remaining dosage
36 weeks
Hauser et al84 6.5-year 2009 Rasagiline (early- Placebo for 6 306 6.5 years Less worsening in total UPDRS
extension of start group) months followed scores in the early-start
the TEMPO by rasagiline group compared to delayed-star
study (delayed-start group
group)
Rascol et al83 prespecified 2011 See Adagio study82 UPDRS motor subscores and
and post-hoc activities of daily living subscale
analyses of improved with both doses of
the ADAGIO rasagiline relative to placebo in
study the early-start versus the
delayed-start groups
The unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS) is used to follow the longitudinal course of PD. It is made up of the 1) Mentation,
Behaviour, and Mood, 2) ADL and 3) Motor sections. These are evaluated by interview. Some sections require multiple grades assigned to each
extremity. A total of 199 points are possible. 199 represents the worst (total) disability), 0--no disability. Single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET).
13

---PAGE BREAK---

3.2.1. LEVODOPA (L-DOPA)-BASED REGIMENS
L-dopa is the standard therapy for motor control of PD and it is still considered the most
effective drug for relieving the widest range of symptoms, including: tremor, stiffness,
slowness, poor muscle control, balance, and difficulties in walking.
In one of the first studies Parkinson’s Study Group examined carbidopa-L-dopa at various daily
doses (compared with placebo; Earlier versus Later L-dopa Therapy in PD; ELLDOPA trial); the
clinical data suggested that L-dopa either slows the progression of PD or has a prolonged
effect on its symptoms. In contrast, the neuroimaging data suggested either that L-dopa
accelerates the loss of nerve terminals or that its pharmacologic effects modify the dopamine
transporter.
The potential long-term effects of L-dopa on PD remain uncertain.72 Although L-dopa is the
most widely used (and effective) therapy for PD, chronic treatment is associated with motor
complications in the majority of patients. It has been hypothesized that providing more
continuous delivery of L-dopa to the brain would reduce the risk of motor complications, and
that this might be accomplished by combining L-dopa with entacapone to extend its
metabolisim. The STRIDE-PD trial, comparing carbidopa-L-dopa with or without entacapone,
showed that initiating L-dopa therapy with L-dopa/carbidopa/entacapone (LCE) failed to
delay the time of onset or reduce the frequency of dyskinesia compared to L-dopa/carbidopa
(LC). In fact, LCE was associated with a shorter time to onset and increased frequency of
dyskinesia compared to LC. In addition they found no difference in longitudinal course of PD
between the groups, but the incidence of myocardial infarction was 1.9% in the LCE group
versus 0% in the LC group, concluding that the addition of entacapone to carbidopa-L-dopa
may actually be deleterious with the increased risk of myocardial infarction.73
3.2.2. DOPAMINE AGONISTS
Because L-dopa controls the symptoms of PD so well (and with so few side effects at the
beginning) there is some benefit for people who start treatment with L-dopa, rather than with
a dopamine agonist. A person with PD who starts treatment with L-dopa may have more early
years with better control of symptoms and fewer side effects. But it also is well documented
that most people who take L-dopa develop motor problems (motor fluctuations or wearing-
off) within 5 to 10 years after starting the medicine. These complications, including
unpredictable swings in motor control between doses and uncontrollable jerking or twitching
(dyskinesias), can be hard to manage and can become as disabling as some of the problems
caused by the disease itself.
A number of studies have been undertaken to evaluate the effects of dopamine agonists
(ropinirole74,75 and pramipexole76,77) relative to L-dopa. All these studies suggest that
compared with L-dopa, dopamine agonists may delay dyskinesia and showed less
14

---PAGE BREAK---

dopamine neuron degeneration, although the value of this clinical effect remains uncertain
and these agents do not improve total disability (using the unified Parkinson's disease rating
scale (UPDRS) score1) compared with L-dopa.
In the attempt to delay the development of motor fluctuations, many providers are now
treating individuals with PD on a dopamine agonist rather than L-dopa. A dopamine agonist
may be used until it no longer adequately relieves symptoms, at which point the person starts
taking L-dopa in addition to the dopamine agonist. Dopamine agonists can also cause severe
sleep problems and hallucinations in some people. Having these side effects may be another
reason to switch to L-dopa. As long as the individual's symptoms are adequately controlled
and they can tolerate the medicine, dopamine agonists may be a good choice for treating
early PD. The American Academy of Neurology now recommends this course of treatment for
most people with early PD, regardless of their age [www.aan.com/Guidelines].
When considering symptomatic drug therapy for both early and complex PD, the NICE
guideline can best be described as ‘permissive’. The relative lack of comparative evidence
between different classes of medicines precludes a firm recommendation for any one
therapeutic strategy. Hence the guideline states that L-dopa, dopamine agonists and
monamine oxidase type B (MAOB) inhibitors (see below) ‘may’ be used as a symptomatic
treatment for early PD. ref
3.2.3. MONOAMINE OXIDASE TYPE-B (MAO-B) INHIBITORS
Recently, several studies have investigated the potential benefit of early treatment with
MAO-B inhibitors such as seleginline80, and rasagiline.81,83,84 In 2004, a meta-analysis
evaluating MAO-B inhibitors in patients with early PD found no difference in mortality among
treatment versus control subjects.79 Patients randomized to MAO-B inhibitor therapy had
significantly improved total UPDRS scores, as well as subdomain UPDRS motor scores and
activities of daily living scores at 3 months. The MAO-B inhibitors were also well tolerated,
with adverse effects and patient withdrawals from the study similar in both groups. These
results illustrated a potential benefit of MAO-B inhibitors, which reduce degeneration of
neurons. MAO-B inhibitors can be considered for initial treatment of early disease. These
drugs provide mild symptomatic benefit, have excellent adverse effect profiles, and,
according to a Cochrane review, have improved long-term outcomes in quality-of-life
indicators by 20-25%.86 More details on the MAO-B inhibitors trials are reported in the table.
a The unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS) is used to follow the longitudinal course of PD. It is made
up of the 1) Mentation, Behavior, and Mood, 2) ADL and 3) Motor sections. These are evaluated by interview.
Some sections require multiple grades assigned to each extremity. A total of 199 points are possible. 199
represents the worst (total) disability), 0--no disability.
15

---PAGE BREAK---

3.2.4. NONPHARMACOLOGICAL THERAPIES
Since 2013, a number of studies have enhanced the literature and have guided clinicians on
successful treatment interventions outside of pharmacotherapy and surgery. Thirty-three
randomized controlled trials and one large observational study on exercise and physiotherapy
were published in this period. Four randomized controlled trials focused on dance
interventions, eight on treatment of cognition and behaviour, two on occupational therapy,
and two on speech and language therapy (the latter two specifically addressed dysphagia).
Three randomized controlled trials focused on multidisciplinary care models, one study on
telemedicine, and four studies on alternative interventions, including music therapy and
mindfulness.87 For example neuro-rehabilitation, including behavioural adaptations, can play
an important role in the management of PD, by helping patients to deal with the decline in
functioning while optimizing participation and quality of life. Its focus is on the patient as a
person; the goals usually relate not only to disease symptoms, but also to social functioning
and well-being.88
However, the scientific evidence on its effectiveness is increasing87,89, and neuro-
rehabilitation is increasingly being integrated in the multidisciplinary care pathways for
patients with PD.90 Many professional disciplines are involved in neuro-rehabilitation,
including e.g. physiotherapists, occupational therapists and speech-language therapists; all
these professionals need to integrate their own specific treatment contribution with each
other, and align this with medical management.
3.2.5. MULTIDISCIPLINARY DISEASE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
A multidisciplinary approach combining pharmacological treatment with non-
pharmacological interventions to manage a complex disorder such as Parkinson's disease
might be beneficial.91 Despite the shortage of evidence for effectiveness92, guidelines
recommend regular access to a broad range of medical and allied health-care professionals93.
Indeed, many centres deliver integrated and multidisciplinary care for patients with
Parkinson's disease.94 However, a standard template for multidisciplinary care in Parkinson's
disease does not exist, and guidelines do not clarify how a team approach should be organised
and structured.
The IMPACT trial{van der Marck, 2013 #193} assessed the effectiveness of an integrated
multidisciplinary approach compared with usual care. This integrated care approach offered
only small benefits to patients with Parkinson's disease, and these disappeared after
correction for baseline disease severity. These results and those of previous studies support
further development of well-designed clinical trials to obtain more knowledge and scientific
evidence on how to organise team-oriented care in Parkinson's disease.
16

---PAGE BREAK---

3.3. THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF EARLY INTERVENTION
3.3.1. COST OF ILLNESS STUDIES
Early intervention is likely to have a significant impact on costs for the healthcare sectors but
also society overall; a number of cost of illness studies have found that the great majority of
costs associated with PD occur in the later stages of the disease, when symptoms are at their
most severe and, consequently, there is more need for healthcare service or caregivers
support. Motor complications (motor fluctuations, dyskinesias, dystonia as uncontrollable
and sometimes painful muscle spasms) have been identified as factors increasing PD-related
costs 95-106. In all these studies severity of the disease was measured using the Hoehn and Yahr
(HY) stage of PD (measured between 1, minimal disability, and 5, confinement to
bed/wheelchair user)2.
 In UK (2007) - Findley and colleagues96 found that the total cost in the UK lies between
£449 million and £3.3 billion [€621 million and €4.6 billion] annually, depending on
the cost model and prevalence rate used. The rise in social services costs was
particularly influenced by the severity of the disease and reached approximately
£7,000 [€9,700] per patient per year at stage 5. Increasing HY stage was also
associated with an increasing proportion of secondary care within NHS costs (27% in
stages 0–1, 62% in stage 5). The study identified that disease severity was the single
most important cost driver: patients at HY stage 5 had costs that were six times higher
than patients at stage 0 or 1 (£2971 vs £18,358; €4,113 vs. € 25,418 per patient per
year). A key factor in this difference was the cost of institutional care. Among
participants in the study who received institutional care, costs were more than 4.5
times higher than for patients who remained at home. The financial burden of
institutional care fell either on social services or on the patients themselves if they
chose private care. Interestingly, medicine costs did not change with increasing
disease severity and consequently they accounted for a lower proportion of the direct
cost of PD in more severe cases. This study clearly shows how PD costs increase with
the progression of the disease.
 In UK (2003) - In another study McCrone and colleagues97 measured service use and
costs for PD patients in the UK. The annual costs were £13,804 [€16,492] per patient.
Formal care costs accounted for 20% of this amount, while informal care was related
to 80% of the burden. Predictors of higher costs were identified, with male gender,
level of disability and depression being the more significant ones.
2 The Hoehn and Yahr scale is a commonly used system for describing how the symptoms of Parkinson's disease
progress. It was originally published in 1967 in the journal Neurology by Melvin Yahr and Margaret Hoehn and
included stages 1 (Unilateral involvement only usually with minimal or no functional disability) through 5
(Confinement to bed or wheelchair unless aided).
17

---PAGE BREAK---

 In UK (2007) - A 2007 study developed in the UK98 showed that Levodopa induced
dyskinesia increased health care costs. Relationship between increasing cost of care
and severity of the disease was proven to be statistically significant. A correlation was
also found between the severity of the disease, patient’s age and the use of Social
Services.
 In Italy (2003) - A study published in 200399 assessed health care costs associated with
PD in Italy. Annual direct health costs were €4,320 for mild stage (HY 1-2), €4,748 for
moderate stage (YH 2.5-3) and €6,175 for severe stage (HY 4-5). The average was
estimated at €4,808. These results were identified as lower than the real cost, as they
didn’t consider the societal perspective and neither informal care nor health care costs
incurred in the private sector were included.
 In Finland (2003) – In Finland the total annual cost-of-illness for PD outpatients was
USD 131 million [EUR 118 million], including direct costs of USD 54.7 million [EUR 49.2
million]. Keranen and colleagues100 found a significant association between PD
severity and annual costs. Total costs in HY stages 1 to 2.5 were comparable, whereas
they doubled in stage 3 and again in stage 4. In early stages of PD, direct costs
accounted for most of the economic burden of the disease. However, for patients with
more advanced PD, with HY stages 3.0–4.0, indirect costs accounted for increasing
amounts of the economic burden, accounting for as much as half of the total costs in
HY stage 4.0.100
 In Germany (2000 and 2004) – Similarly in a German study101 it was found that disease
severity (i.e. HY stage) alongside with motor complications and age, affected the costs
of PD. The resource utilization in two cohorts of PD patients recruited in 2000 (n=145)
and 2004 (n=133) were compared. Direct and indirect costs were assessed based on a
patient diary and structured personal interviews. In 2004, total annual costs for PD
ranged from €18,660 for HY (1 to 2) to €31,660 for HY (2 to 5). As compared to costs
in 2000, total costs increased in 2004 by 25-31%.
 In Germany (2004–2006) – In a subsequent German study102, the total costs per
patient were €20,860 per PD patient; they increased according to HY disease stage
severity, from average cost of €3,400 for HY stage 1 to €15,000 for HY stage 5, with
the majority of costs originating from outside the formal healthcare system. When
analysing the costs by HY stage, in contrast to the findings of the Finnish study, indirect
costs remained stable over the course of the disease, but the direct costs in the
advanced disease stages increase disproportionately.
 In Spain (2012) - Matinez-Martin and colleagues103 estimated the magnitude in which
PD symptoms and health-related QoL determined PD costs over a 4-year period. Mean
18

---PAGE BREAK---

(SD) PD total costs increased about 92%, from €2,082.17 (€ 2,889) in year 1 to €
4,008.6 (€7,757) in year 4. Total, direct and indirect cost increased 46%, 35%, and 70%,
respectively, for mild disease (HY 1-3), whereas increases of 166% for total, 56% for
direct and 348% for indirect costs in patients with moderate PD (HY 4) was observed.
For severe patients (HY 5), cost remained almost the same throughout the study.
 In Russia (2008). Costs of PD illness were studied also in Russia within a cohort of 100
patients.104 From the societal perspective, total annual costs per patient amounted to
€5,240 per patient, with direct costs accounting for 67% and indirect costs for 33% of
the total. The main drivers of the burden were informal care and drugs. Global costs
for the nation were estimated at €1.1 billion per year.
 In Czech Republic (2010). A more recent study105 was performed in a cohort of 100
Czech patients with idiopathic PD to evaluate direct and indirect costs and to identify
cost-driving factors. Results were assessed for a 6-month period and have been
projected to annual costs. Total annual costs for PD were €11,020 per patient. Direct
costs accounted for 60% of the total costs and indirect for 40%. Independent cost
driving factors included disease severity, motor complications, psychosis and age.
 In a 6-month international observational study of PD in France, Germany and the
UK106, patients with different degrees of motor complications, measured using the
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), and its effects on health care costs
were examined. Dyskinesia was associated with significant increases in total health
care costs. Each unit increase in dyskinesia score lead to €562 additional costs per
patient over a 6-month period.
The economic evidence gathered in the literature shows that any strategy that would
maintain PD symptoms in the earlier stages of the disease (when they are fewer and less
severe) would likely prove substantially beneficial toward limiting expenditures. It is,
therefore, possible that therapeutic interventions offered to patients before significant
deterioration has occurred, when the potential for preserving neurophysiologic structures is
maximized, may offer long-term cost savings. Indeed, little evidence points to the likelihood
of short-term savings with early therapeutic intervention (although little evidence in this area
exists in general), but long-term cost savings are entirely credible based on the delay of L-
dopa therapy and of the motor symptoms that require more intensive therapeutic
interventions.45
19

---PAGE BREAK---

3.3.2. COST-EFFECTIVENESS STUDIES
A number of cost-effectiveness studies have also been undertaken to determine the
economic value of early intervention for PD, and the results have been largely, if not
unanimously, positive.
 Dopamine agonist or MAO-B inhibitor (compared with L-dopa; UK 2009) 107- A study
in the UK found that early treatment was cost-effective when patients with PD were
treated with a dopamine agonist or MAO-B inhibitor (from a United Kingdom payer
perspective). Early treatment delayed onset of dyskinesia and L-dopa initiation, and
were associated with cost savings over a 5-year study period. More specifically, in this
Markov model economic evaluation, data from 2 trials of dopamine agonists
(rasagiline, pramipexole) in early PD were examined for effectiveness (time to L-dopa
and time to L-dopa-induced dyskinesia), cost, and quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).
Rasagiline was found to reduce costs by 18% per patient over 5 years and
demonstrated a 25% prolongation of time to L-dopa and a 10% delay in onset of
dyskinesia. Rasagiline also demonstrated a 5% gain in QALYs relative to pramipexole.
 Dopamine agonist (compared with L-dopa; USA 2005) 108- Another cost effectiveness
study conducted from a US societal perspective found that treatment with
pramipexole in patients with early PD was more cost effective and was associated with
cost savings versus L-dopa in patients with depression and low baseline QoL. Under
the base-case assumptions, the ICER for pramipexole was 42,989 US$ per QALY
[€33,178 per QALY]. The probability that pramipexole was cost effective relative to L-
dopa over the first 4 years was 0.57, 0.77 and 0.82 when a QALY was valued at 50,000
US$ [€38,589], 100,000 US$ [€77,178], and 150,000 US$ [€115,767], respectively.
Over time, the ICER for pramipexole improved and uncertainty around the ICER
decreased. If, after treatment withdrawal, QoL improved in pramipexole subjects and
declined in L-dopa subjects (best-case scenario for pramipexole), the probability of
pramipexole being cost effective increased to 0.88, 0.96 and 0.98, respectively.
Factors that improved the ICER of pramipexole were a decrease in the relative price
of pramipexole and having low QoL or depression at baseline.
 Dopamine agonist (compared with baseline treatment patterns; USA 1998) 109- In an
older study, Hoerger et al also found that pramipexole was cost-effective compared
with baseline treatment despite initially higher medicine costs, especially in patients
with early PD. For patients with advanced PD, the ICER was US$12,294/QALY, whereas
for patients with early onset of PD, the ICER for pramipexole was US$8,837/QALY.
All these economic analyses demonstrate that treatments other than L-dopa, especially when
initiated early, may be cost-effective. However, despite this apparent benefit of utilizing
20

---PAGE BREAK---

dopamine agonists in early PD to delay the need for L-dopa and to achieve cost savings, there
is still controversy regarding when to initiate treatment. These studies referred to early
treatment in the sense of the disease being treated soon after standard PD diagnosis has been
achieved.45 If early PD is defined as that period prior to the onset of significant motor
symptoms, then, as already considered with clinical outcomes, few data are available on the
real potential for cost savings.
3.4. THE BENEFITS OF TREATMENT ADHERENCE
3.4.1. THE CLINICAL BENEFITS
Patients with PD should take their medication as prescribed for numerous reasons.
Firstly, sudden withdrawal of dopaminergic drugs can result in suppression of central
dopamine transmission and thus trigger the neuroleptic malignant syndrome, which may lead
to fatality.110
Secondly, sporadic dopamine levels in blood plasma, partly from inadequate timing of
medication taking, correlate with alternating high and low levels in the brain. Such erratic
stimulation (the so called peak and trough effect) is proposed to result in motor fluctuations.
Researchers evaluating the effect of reduced pill intake in PD showed that non adherence was
associated with the ‘wearing off’ of the treatment effect.111 This was shown to result in motor
fluctuations and increased risk of worsening symptoms compared to medication adherent
individuals. Furthermore, poor adherence to treatment was associated with more unplanned
hospital admissions for PD related problems and an overall poorer prognosis.
Interestingly, and perhaps unique to PD, non-adherence to medication is not specific to sub-
optimal pill intake. Patients may also non-adhere by over medicating. Excessive intake of
dopaminergic agents was prevalent in 10% of patients diagnosed with PD at a younger age.39
The consequences of over medicating can be substantial and include severe medication
induced dyskinesia, behavioural disturbances and potentially even psychosis.112,113
Medication non-adherence in PD also has serious consequences for other parties involved.
From the perspective of family members, their relative’s health is likely to deteriorate leading
to poor QoL and increasing care requirements. This can place significant burden on the
spouse/carer which can greatly affect their health and QoL. For treating clinicians, future
management decisions are based on the premise that the patient is correctly taking the
intended treatments. Dose escalation, adjunctive therapy use and, in some cases, diagnostic
reconsideration may all be consequences of poor adherence.114 115
21

---PAGE BREAK---

3.4.2. THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS
Several USA-based studies reported that treatment adherence may have an impact on direct
costs.
 Davis et al (2010) employing insurance claims data from 30 managed care plans (using
the Integrated Health Care Information Services Database), estimated that 61% of PD
patients were non adherent to therapy over a 12-month period.48 Mean medical costs
were significantly higher among non-adherent versus adherent subjects (US$15,826
vs US$9,228 [€11,885 vs. €6,930]; P <0.01) despite the former having significantly
lower prescription medicine costs (US$2,684 vs US$3,854 [€2,015 vs. €2,894]; P
<0.05).
 These data are consistent with results from another study in the USA (2011) showing
that patients who were satisfactorily adherent to L-dopa/carbidopa/entacapone
therapy had 39% fewer PD-related hospitalizations, 9% greater PD-related
prescriptions, 47% lower inpatient costs, and 18% lower total costs than patients with
unsatisfactory adherence. Overall all-cause total costs were US$3,508 [€2,360] less for
those with satisfactory versus unsatisfactory adherence.116
 Data from a national database of managed care plans (2010) found that non-adherer
patients had significantly higher rates of yearly hospitalizations, healthcare visits, and
higher total medical costs (US$15,826 vs. US$9,228; €11,885 vs. €6930) despite lower
prescription medicine costs. Overall non-adherence was associated with a US$3,451
[€2,591] yearly increase in medical costs.117
 More data from the USA (2013)118 showed that, although total drug mean costs were
higher for compliant patients than non-compliant patients (driven mainly by the cost
of PD-related medications), the mean costs associated with emergency room and
inpatient visits were higher for patients non-compliant with their prescribed
medication. Overall, the total all-cause annual healthcare mean cost was lower for
compliant than for non-compliant patients (US$77,499 vs. US$84,949; €59,286 vs.
€64,985).
3.4.3. NEW INTERVENTIONS TO SUPPORT ADHERENCE
A Cochrane review of interventions for enhancing medication adherence across numerous
medical conditions found only a small number to have a statistically significant impact on
short- and long-term adherence, with improvement in treatment outcomes even less
common. Of the successful interventions, most were complex combinations of increased
22

---PAGE BREAK---

follow-up, regimen simplification, mailed and telephoned reminders or reinforcement,
counselling, and supportive care.119
For example, a study in the UK (2007) compared targeted verbal and written patient
education on the continuous dopaminergic theory to usual care. Electronic medication
monitoring devices assessed adherence to medication timing before and after the
educational intervention.120 At baseline, only 17–21% of all medications were taken at the
appropriate time interval, with a statistically significant increase to 39% of all doses in the
active group post-intervention. There were no statistically significant differences between
QoL, UPDRS scores, or adverse events between groups. The study was limited by short follow-
up and substantial attrition in both groups. A second study is evaluating a brief form of
cognitive-behavioural therapy focused on medication adherence in patients and caregivers
with PD.121 This study, too, is limited by a short duration of planned follow-up, and the
assessment of medication adherence by a surrogate marker rather than a gold standard.
Further research is necessary to explore the patient characteristics, beliefs, and decision-
making processes associated with medication non-adherence. These investigations should
include for example electronic medication monitoring caps (medication monitoring systems
that track medication usage without active input from the patient)114 and account for the
frequent involvement of family and caregivers in PD management.
It is also important to consider the complexity of PD, and the fact that it is a chronic disease
with a spectrum of manifestations that appear and change as the disease progresses.
Consequently, treatment efficacy and patient well-being are improved when a
multidisciplinary disease management approach to PD is implemented and specialists (i.e.
neurologists) are part of the management team alongside other healthcare professionals as
appropriate.122 By employing a multidisciplinary disease-management strategy, healthcare
professionals with expertise in PD can provide informed guidance with regard to the selection
of treatments that are likely to be most effective and to which patients are most likely to be
adherent.
23

---PAGE BREAK---

4. KEY MESSAGES FROM THE LITERATURE
The literature confirms that early diagnosis and treatment of PD are paramount to: reducing
the risk of disease progression; limiting the effects of PD on QoL; and potentially lowering
long-term treatment costs.
Standard current approaches to PD diagnosis rely on the presence of motor symptoms;
therefore the diagnosis is mainly clinical, and may occur at later stage of the disease, when
significant irreversible neurological damage may have already occurred and there is no
opportunity to delay disease progression.
However, the combination of a new definition of PD (to include early pre-motor symptoms)
and new diagnostic tools may allow for early diagnosis, and therefore treatment of the
disease. Biologic biomarkers offer some of the most useful tools for reliable early PD
diagnosis. In addition, neuroimaging techniques, particularly SPECT and MRS, also show
enormous potential because of their high degrees of sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing
early PD. However a widespread use of such screening strategies may be limited by practical
constraints due to the limited availability of the medical technologies and their high costs.
Any cost savings resulting from an early diagnosis achieved through the implementation of
better neuroimaging techniques should take into account the implementation cost.
Patient’s treatment adherence has also been identified as a key area which is able to impact
clinical outcomes and costs. Finally, a disease-management strategy through the
implementation of a chronic model of care, is important to improve treatment adherence and
rates of correct diagnosis. Clinicians should be informed regarding proper diagnostic
approaches, ensuring diagnosis is performed by those clinicians with appropriate skill sets,
and availing them of emerging techniques for early and accurate diagnosis.
It is important that healthcare managers and policy makers recognise the changes taking
place in the detection and treatment of PD, and take advantage of opportunities for the
earliest possible intervention in PD before major neurological damage occurs and treatment
may become less effective and more expensive.45
24

---PAGE BREAK---

5. WHAT HAS NOT BEEN ADDRESSED SO FAR AND SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED IN FUTURE RESEARCH?
5.1. RETHINKING WHAT PD IS AND HOW/WHEN IT CAN BE DIAGNOSED
The recent developments in PD diagnosis emphasise the necessity of rethinking what PD is
and how, and when, it can be diagnosed. Clinicians are aware that the current diagnostic tools
and guidance should be updated in light of current knowledge of PD to optimize its early
detection. Critical issues to be solved with regard to the current PD definition includes:
 Who decides what PD is and what is the gold standard for a “final” diagnosis? What
clinical features fit under the definition of PD and should be incorporated into the
diagnosis? With regard to defining disease onset, can PD be defined before classic
motor features develop? Are new diagnostic tools needed to fit the new definition
of PD?
In recognition of the profound changes in the understanding of PD, the International
Parkinson and Movement Disorders Society (MDS) has recently commissioned a task force
to discuss these critical issues and to consider a redefinition of PD.123 More research is
needed to further explore these key areas which should be informed by solid real-world
evidence rather than by limited clinical practice.
 How do we define early PD? Despite the evidence of the beneficial effects of early
diagnosis and treatment, all the studies found in the literature define early PD only in
the sense of the disease being treated soon after standard PD diagnosis has been
achieved, i.e. after the presence of motor symptoms (when around 70% of all
dopamine neurons may have been lost).45
If, however, early PD is defined as that period prior to the onset of significant motor
symptoms, before substantial neurological damage may have occurred, then limited data is
available that describes the real potential of early treatment in terms of clinical and economic
outcomes. Thus, more research would be needed to explore the real impact of early
treatment both on clinical and economic outcomes.
Furthermore, with the advent of new diagnostic tools, such as genetic biomarkers,
forthcoming studies should assess the impact of these medical innovations in terms of clinical
and economic outcomes.
5.2. DO WE HAVE PREFERRED TREATMENT OPTIONS?
Although the literature seems to confirm that early treatment is beneficial, there is still
debate regarding whether treatment (with L-dopa which is limited by eventual wearing-off
25

---PAGE BREAK---

effects) should be initiated immediately or delayed until greater motor functional disability
presents.124 In addition to the wearing-off effect, there is also some risk of additional side
effects involved with starting treatment early. Certain medicines commonly used in PD
including L-dopa, anticholinergic agents, and dopamine agonists are associated with different
side effects (e.g hypotension, arrhythmia, insomnia, hallucinations) that can have a negative
impact on patient’ QoL and therapeutic adherence. Nonetheless, early treatment of PD might
bring important benefits, such as potentially enhancing the effects of mechanisms that
compensate for the deficits caused by PD. What is still unclear is whether early treatment can
bring neuroprotection or whether outcome modification can be achieved. Also being
questioned is the effect of early initiation of a therapy other than L-dopa on disease
progression.72 The benefits of alternative medicine formulations, regimen simplification, or
non-pharmacological interventions (for examples see neuro-rehabilitation89, the
introduction of ICT [information and communications technology] wearable sensors125 and
integrated care models126) should be further explored as these may present opportunities to
improve outcomes and lower costs in PD.
Considering health systems reforms taking place all over Europe and the challenges related
to the management of chronic conditions, including co-morbidities and ageing, new models
of care that include a societal benefits approach need to be examined to ensure more
coordinated and integrated care. The EBC Value of Treatment project for 2015-2017127 aims
at developing and applying to brain disorders a new integrated care model framework and
therefore promote a more holistic management of chronic conditions in Europe. The project
will provide evidence on how to implement effective and cost-effective interventions across
a series of brain disorders, including Parkinson’s disease.
26

---PAGE BREAK---

6. REFERENCES
1. Obeso JA, Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Rodriguez M, et al. Pathophysiology of the basal ganglia in
Parkinson's disease. Trends Neurosci. 2000;23(10 Suppl):S8-19.
2. Yasuda T, Nakata Y, Mochizuki H. alpha-Synuclein and neuronal cell death. Mol Neurobiol.
2013;47(2):466-483.
3. Andlin-Sobocki P1 JB, Wittchen HU, Olesen J. Cost of disorders of the brain in Europe. Eur J
Neurol. 2005;12 Suppl 1:1-27.
4. Olesen J, Baker MG, Freund T, et al. Consensus document on European brain research. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006;77 Suppl 1:i1-49.
5. Gustavsson A, Svensson M, Jacobi F, et al. Cost of disorders of the brain in Europe 2010. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011;21(10):718-779.
6. Nussbaum RL, Ellis CE. Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med.
2003;348(14):1356-1364.
7. Chrischilles EA, Rubenstein LM, Voelker MD, Wallace RB, Rodnitzky RL. The health burdens of
Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 1998;13(3):406-413.
8. Pringsheim T, Jette N, Frolkis A, Steeves TD. The prevalence of Parkinson's disease: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Mov Disord. 2014;29(13):1583-1590.
9. de Lau LM, Breteler MM. Epidemiology of Parkinson's disease. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5(6):525-
535.
10. Network. SIG. Diagnosis and pharmacological management of Parkinson’s disease: a national
clinical guideline. Edinburgh: SIGN. 2010.
11. Bloem BR, Stocchi F. Move for Change Part III: a European survey evaluating the impact of the
EPDA Charter for People with Parkinson's Disease. Eur J Neurol. 2015;22(1):133-141, e138-
139.
12. Huse DM, Schulman K, Orsini L, Castelli-Haley J, Kennedy S, Lenhart G. Burden of illness in
Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2005;20(11):1449-1454.
13. Wittchen HU, Jacobi F. Size and burden of mental disorders in Europe--a critical review and
appraisal of 27 studies. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005;15(4):357-376.
14. Balak N, Elmaci I. Costs of disorders of the brain in Europe. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14(2):e9.
15. Kowal SL, Dall TM, Chakrabarti R, Storm MV, Jain A. The current and projected economic
burden of Parkinson's disease in the United States. Mov Disord. 2013;28(3):311-318.
16. Rajput AH, Uitti RJ, Offord KP. Timely levodopa (LD) administration prolongs survival in
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 1997;3(3):159-165.
17. Metz D. Can the impact of ageing on health care costs be avoided? J Health Serv Res Policy.
1999;4(4):249-252.
18. Schrag A, Jahanshahi M, Quinn N. What contributes to quality of life in patients with
Parkinson's disease? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69(3):308-312.
19. Kuopio AM, Marttila RJ, Helenius H, Toivonen M, Rinne UK. The quality of life in Parkinson's
disease. Mov Disord. 2000;15(2):216-223.
20. Duncan GW, Khoo TK, Yarnall AJ, et al. Health-related quality of life in early Parkinson's
disease: the impact of nonmotor symptoms. Mov Disord. 2014;29(2):195-202.
21. Breen DP, Michell AW, Barker RA. Parkinson's disease--the continuing search for biomarkers.
Clin Chem Lab Med. 2011;49(3):393-401.
27

---PAGE BREAK---

22. Pahwa R, Lyons KE. Early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease: recommendations from diagnostic
clinical guidelines. Am J Manag Care. 2010;16(9):S94-99.
23. Suchowersky O, Reich S, Perlmutter J, Zesiewicz T, Gronseth G, Weiner WJ. Practice
Parameter: diagnosis and prognosis of new onset Parkinson disease (an evidence-based
review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology. Neurology. 2006;66(7):968-975.
24. Dauer W, Przedborski S. Parkinson's disease: mechanisms and models. Neuron.
2003;39(6):889-909.
25. Karlsen KH, Tandberg E, Arsland D, Larsen JP. Health related quality of life in Parkinson's
disease: a prospective longitudinal study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69(5):584-589.
26. Massano J, Bhatia KP. Clinical approach to Parkinson's disease: features, diagnosis, and
principles of management. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(6).
27. Jankovic J. Parkinson's disease: clinical features and diagnosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2008;79(4):368-376.
28. de Lau LM, Giesbergen PC, de Rijk MC, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM. Incidence of
parkinsonism and Parkinson disease in a general population: the Rotterdam Study. Neurology.
2004;63(7):1240-1244.
29. Grosset D, Taurah L, Burn DJ, et al. A multicentre longitudinal observational study of changes
in self reported health status in people with Parkinson's disease left untreated at diagnosis. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78(5):465-469.
30. Gage H, Hendricks A, Zhang S, Kazis L. The relative health related quality of life of veterans
with Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74(2):163-169.
31. Louis ED, Rohl B, Rice C. Defining the Treatment Gap: What Essential Tremor Patients Want
That They Are Not Getting. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2015;5:331.
32. Leopold NA, Polansky M, Hurka MR. Drug adherence in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord.
2004;19(5):513-517.
33. Grosset D, Antonini A, Canesi M, et al. Adherence to antiparkinson medication in a multicenter
European study. Mov Disord. 2009;24(6):826-832.
34. Kulkarni AS, Balkrishnan R, Anderson RT, Edin HM, Kirsch J, Stacy MA. Medication adherence
and associated outcomes in medicare health maintenance organization-enrolled older adults
with Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2008;23(3):359-365.
35. Daley DJ, Myint PK, Gray RJ, Deane KH. Systematic review on factors associated with
medication non-adherence in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord.
2012;18(10):1053-1061.
36. Grosset KA, Reid JL, Grosset DG. Medicine-taking behavior: implications of suboptimal
compliance in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2005;20(11):1397-1404.
37. Grosset KA, Bone I, Grosset DG. Suboptimal medication adherence in Parkinson's disease. Mov
Disord. 2005;20(11):1502-1507.
38. DiMatteo MR, Lepper HS, Croghan TW. Depression is a risk factor for noncompliance with
medical treatment - Meta-analysis of the effects of anxiety and depression on patient
adherence. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(14):2101-2107.
39. Grosset KA, Bone I, Grosset DG. Suboptimal medication adherence in Parkinson's disease.
Movement Disord. 2005;20(11):1502-1507.
40. Insel K, Morrow D, Brewer B, Figueredo A. Executive function, working memory, and
medication adherence among older adults. J Gerontol B-Psychol. 2006;61(2):P102-P107.
28

---PAGE BREAK---

41. Hughes CM. Medication non-adherence in the elderly - How big is the problem? Drug Aging.
2004;21(12):793-811.
42. Gazmararian JA, Kripalani S, Miller MJ, Echt KV, Ren JL, Rask K. Factors associated with
medication refill adherence in cardiovascular-related diseases: A focus on health literacy. J
Gen Intern Med. 2006;21(12):1215-1221.
43. Gellad WF, Grenard JL, Marcum ZA. A Systematic Review of Barriers to Medication Adherence
in the Elderly: Looking Beyond Cost and Regimen Complexity. Am J Geriatr Pharmac.
2011;9(1):11-23.
44. Daley DJ, Myint PK, Gray RJ, Deane KHO. Systematic review on factors associated with
medication non-adherence in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2012;18(10):1053-
1061.
45. Murman DL. Early treatment of Parkinson's disease: opportunities for managed care. Am J
Manag Care. 2012;18(7 Suppl):S183-188.
46. Building on 50 years of levodopa therapy. Lancet Neurology. 2016;15(1):1-1.
47. Rigby D. Adherence assessment tools: Drugs dont work when they're not taken. The Australian
Journal of Pharmacy. 2007;88:32-33.
48. Davis KL, Edin HM, Allen JK. Prevalence and cost of medication nonadherence in Parkinson's
disease: evidence from administrative claims data. Mov Disord. 2010;25(4):474-480.
49. Prakash KM, Nadkarni NV, Lye WK, Yong MH, Tan EK. The impact of non-motor symptoms on
the quality of life of Parkinson's disease patients: a longitudinal study. Eur J Neurol. 2016.
50. Martinez-Martin P, Rodriguez-Blazquez C, Kurtis MM, Chaudhuri KR, Group NV. The impact of
non-motor symptoms on health-related quality of life of patients with Parkinson's disease.
Mov Disord. 2011;26(3):399-406.
51. Fargel M, Grobe B, Oesterle E, Hastedt C, Rupp M. Treatment of Parkinson's disease: a survey
of patients and neurologists. Clin Drug Investig. 2007;27(3):207-218.
52. Schapira AH, Barone P, Hauser RA, et al. Patient-reported convenience of once-daily versus
three-times-daily dosing during long-term studies of pramipexole in early and advanced
Parkinson's disease. Eur J Neurol. 2013;20(1):50-56.
53. Santos-Garcia D, Prieto-Formoso M, de la Fuente-Fernandez R. Levodopa dosage determines
adherence to long-acting dopamine agonists in Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Sci. 2012;318(1-
2):90-93.
54. Poewe WH, Rascol O, Quinn N, et al. Efficacy of pramipexole and transdermal rotigotine in
advanced Parkinson's disease: a double-blind, double-dummy, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet Neurol. 2007;6(6):513-520.
55. Martinez-Martin P, Rodriguez-Blazquez C, Kurtis MM, Chaudhuri KR. The impact of non-motor
symptoms on health-related quality of life of patients with Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord.
2011;26(3):399-406.
56. Antonini A, Barone P, Marconi R, et al. The progression of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's
disease and their contribution to motor disability and quality of life. J Neurol.
2012;259(12):2621-2631.
57. Pagan FL. Improving outcomes through early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. Am J Manag
Care. 2012;18(7 Suppl):S176-182.
58. Lang AE. A critical appraisal of the premotor symptoms of Parkinson's disease: potential
usefulness in early diagnosis and design of neuroprotective trials. Mov Disord. 2011;26(5):775-
783.
29

---PAGE BREAK---

59. Tolosa E, Gaig C, Santamaria J, Compta Y. Diagnosis and the premotor phase of Parkinson
disease. Neurology. 2009;72(7 Suppl).
60. Lebouvier T, Neunlist M, Bruley des Varannes S, et al. Colonic biopsies to assess the
neuropathology of Parkinson's disease and its relationship with symptoms. PLoS One.
2010;5(9):0012728.
61. Hawkes CH, Shephard BC, Daniel SE. Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1997;62(5):436-446.
62. Wenning GK, Shephard B, Hawkes C, Petruckevitch A, Lees A, Quinn N. Olfactory function in
atypical parkinsonian syndromes. Acta Neurol Scand. 1995;91(4):247-250.
63. Katzenschlager R, Zijlmans J, Evans A, Watt H, Lees AJ. Olfactory function distinguishes
vascular parkinsonism from Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2004;75(12):1749-1752.
64. Khan NL, Katzenschlager R, Watt H, et al. Olfaction differentiates parkin disease from early-
onset parkinsonism and Parkinson disease. Neurology. 2004;62(7):1224-1226.
65. Busse K, Heilmann R, Kleinschmidt S, et al. Value of combined midbrain sonography, olfactory
and motor function assessment in the differential diagnosis of early Parkinson's disease. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012;83(4):441-447.
66. Adler CH. Premotor symptoms and early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. Int J Neurosci.
2011;2:3-8.
67. Alves G, Bronnick K, Aarsland D, et al. CSF amyloid-beta and tau proteins, and cognitive
performance, in early and untreated Parkinson's disease: the Norwegian ParkWest study. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010;81(10):1080-1086.
68. Kansara S, Trivedi A, Chen S, Jankovic J, Le W. Early diagnosis and therapy of Parkinson's
disease: can disease progression be curbed? J Neural Transm. 2013;120(1):197-210.
69. Molochnikov L, Rabey JM, Dobronevsky E, et al. A molecular signature in blood identifies early
Parkinson's disease. Mol Neurodegener. 2012;7(26):1750-1326.
70. Niethammer M, Feigin A, Eidelberg D. Functional neuroimaging in Parkinson's disease. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(5).
71. Breen DP, Rowe JB, Barker RA. Role of brain imaging in early parkinsonism. BMJ.
2011;342:d638.
72. Fahn S, Oakes D, Shoulson I, et al. Levodopa and the progression of Parkinson's disease. N Engl
J Med. 2004;351(24):2498-2508.
73. Stocchi F, Rascol O, Kieburtz K, et al. Initiating levodopa/carbidopa therapy with and without
entacapone in early Parkinson disease: the STRIDE-PD study. Ann Neurol. 2010;68(1):18-27.
74. Rascol O, Brooks DJ, Korczyn AD, De Deyn PP, Clarke CE, Lang AE. A five-year study of the
incidence of dyskinesia in patients with early Parkinson's disease who were treated with
ropinirole or levodopa. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(20):1484-1491.
75. Whone AL, Watts RL, Stoessl AJ, et al. Slower progression of Parkinson's disease with
ropinirole versus levodopa: The REAL-PET study. Ann Neurol. 2003;54(1):93-101.
76. Pramipexole vs levodopa as initial treatment for Parkinson disease: A randomized controlled
trial. Parkinson Study Group. Jama. 2000;284(15):1931-1938.
77. Dopamine transporter brain imaging to assess the effects of pramipexole vs levodopa on
Parkinson disease progression. Jama. 2002;287(13):1653-1661.
78. Stowe RL, Ives NJ, Clarke C, et al. Dopamine agonist therapy in early Parkinson's disease.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;16(2).
30

---PAGE BREAK---

79. Ives NJ, Stowe RL, Marro J, et al. Monoamine oxidase type B inhibitors in early Parkinson's
disease: meta-analysis of 17 randomised trials involving 3525 patients. Bmj.
2004;329(7466):13.
80. Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on the progression of disability in early Parkinson's disease.
N Engl J Med. 1993;328(3):176-183.
81. A controlled trial of rasagiline in early Parkinson disease: the TEMPO Study. Arch Neurol.
2002;59(12):1937-1943.
82. Olanow CW, Rascol O, Hauser R, et al. A double-blind, delayed-start trial of rasagiline in
Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(13):1268-1278.
83. Rascol O, Fitzer-Attas CJ, Hauser R, et al. A double-blind, delayed-start trial of rasagiline in
Parkinson's disease (the ADAGIO study): prespecified and post-hoc analyses of the need for
additional therapies, changes in UPDRS scores, and non-motor outcomes. Lancet Neurol.
2011;10(5):415-423.
84. Hauser RA, Lew MF, Hurtig HI, Ondo WG, Wojcieszek J, Fitzer-Attas CJ. Long-term outcome of
early versus delayed rasagiline treatment in early Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord.
2009;24(4):564-573.
85. Gray R, Ives N, Rick C, et al. Long-term effectiveness of dopamine agonists and monoamine
oxidase B inhibitors compared with levodopa as initial treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD
MED): a large, open-label, pragmatic randomised. Lancet. 2014;384(9949):1196-1205.
86. Caslake R, Macleod A, Ives N, Stowe R, Counsell C. Monoamine oxidase B inhibitors versus
other dopaminergic agents in early Parkinson's disease. Cochrane Db Syst Rev. 2009(4).
87. Bloem BR, de Vries NM, Ebersbach G. Nonpharmacological Treatments for Patients with
Parkinson's Disease. Movement Disord. 2015;30(11):1504-1520.
88. Barnes MP. Principles of neurological rehabilitation. J Neurol Neurosur Ps. 2003;74:3-7.
89. Ekker MS, Janssen S, Nonnekes J, Bloem BR, de Vries NM. Neurorehabilitation for Parkinson's
disease: Future perspectives for behavioural adaptation. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2016;22:S73-
S77.
90. van der Marck MA, Bloem BR. How to organize multispecialty care for patients with
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014;20 Suppl 1:S167-173.
91. Cheung YF. Multidisciplinary care with deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease patients.
Hong Kong Med J. 2014;20(6):472-473.
92. Prizer LP, Browner N. The integrative care of Parkinson's disease: a systematic review. J
Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2(2):79-86.
93. Stewart DA. NICE guideline for Parkinson's disease. Age Ageing. 2007;36(3):240-242.
94. van der Marck MA, Kalf JG, Sturkenboom IH, Nijkrake MJ, Munneke M, Bloem BR.
Multidisciplinary care for patients with Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord.
2009;15 Suppl 3:S219-223.
95. Dowding CH, Shenton CL, Salek SS. A review of the health-related quality of life and economic
impact of Parkinson's disease. Drugs Aging. 2006;23(9):693-721.
96. Findley L, Aujla M, Bain PG, et al. Direct economic impact of Parkinson's disease: a research
survey in the United Kingdom. Mov Disord. 2003;18(10):1139-1145.
97. McCrone P, Allcock LM, Burn DJ. Predicting the cost of Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord.
2007;22(6):804-812.
98. Thanvi B, Lo N, Robinson T. Levodopa-induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease: clinical
features, pathogenesis, prevention and treatment. Postgrad Med J. 2007;83(980):384-388.
31

---PAGE BREAK---

99. Zecchinelli A, et al. Social costs of Parkinson’s disease in Italy. Paper presented at: 6th ISPOR
Annual European Congress, Barcelona2003.
100. Keranen T, Kaakkola S, Sotaniemi K, et al. Economic burden and quality of life impairment
increase with severity of PD. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2003;9(3):163-168.
101. Winter Y, Balzer-Geldsetzer M, von Campenhausen S, et al. Trends in resource utilization for
Parkinson's disease in Germany. J Neurol Sci. 2010;294(1-2):18-22.
102. Richard Dodel J-PR, Monika Balzer and Wolfgang H Oertel. . The Economic Burden of
Parkinson’s Disease. Report, Touch Briefings. 2008.
103. Martinez-Martin P, Rodriguez-Blazquez C, Paz S, et al. Parkinson Symptoms and Health
Related Quality of Life as Predictors of Costs: A Longitudinal Observational Study with Linear
Mixed Model Analysis. Plos One. 2015;10(12).
104. Winter Y, von Campenhausen S, Popov G, et al. Social and clinical determinants of quality of
life in Parkinson's disease in a Russian cohort study. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2010;16(4):243-
248.
105. Winter Y, von Campenhausen S, Brozova H, et al. Costs of Parkinson's disease in Eastern
Europe: A Czech cohort study. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2010;16(1):51-56.
106. Pechevis M, Clarke CE, Vieregge P, et al. Effects of dyskinesias in Parkinson's disease on quality
of life and health-related costs: a prospective European study. European Journal of Neurology.
2005;12(12):956-963.
107. Haycox A, Armand C, Murteira S, Cochran J, Francois C. Cost effectiveness of rasagiline and
pramipexole as treatment strategies in early Parkinson's disease in the UK setting: an
economic Markov model evaluation. Drugs Aging. 2009;26(9):791-801.
108. Noyes K, Dick AW, Holloway RG. Pramipexole and levodopa in early Parkinson's disease:
dynamic changes in cost effectiveness. Pharmacoeconomics. 2005;23(12):1257-1270.
109. Hoerger TJ, Bala MV, Rowland C, Greer M, Chrischilles EA, Holloway RG. Cost effectiveness of
pramipexole in Parkinson's disease in the US. Pharmacoeconomics. 1998;14(5):541-557.
110. Mizuno Y, Takubo H, Mizuta E, Kuno S. Malignant syndrome in Parkinson's disease: concept
and review of the literature. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2003;9:S3-S9.
111. Kulkarni AS, Balkrishnan R, Anderson RT, Edin HM, Kirsch J, Stacy MA. Medication adherence
and associated outcomes in Medicare Health Maintenance Organization - Enrolled older
adults with Parkinson's disease. Movement Disord. 2008;23(3):359-365.
112. Merims D, Giladi N. Dopamine dysregulation syndrome, addiction and behavioral changes in
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat D. 2008;14(4):273-280.
113. O'Sullivan SS, Evans AH, Lees AJ. Dopamine Dysregulation Syndrome An Overview of its
Epidemiology, Mechanisms and Management. Cns Drugs. 2009;23(2):157-170.
114. Bainbridge JL, Ruscin JM. Challenges of Treatment Adherence in Older Patients with
Parkinson's Disease. Drug Aging. 2009;26(2):145-155.
115. Grosset D, Stu EPTC. Therapy adherence issues in Parkinson's disease. Journal of the
Neurological Sciences. 2010;289(1-2):115-118.
116. Delea TE, Thomas SK, Hagiwara M. The association between adherence to
levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone therapy and healthcare utilization and costs among patients
with Parkinson's disease: a retrospective claims-based analysis. CNS Drugs. 2011;25(1):53-66.
117. Davis KL, Edin HM, Allen JK. Prevalence and Cost of Medication Nonadherence in Parkinson's
Disease: Evidence from Administrative Claims Data. Movement Disord. 2010;25(4):474-480.
32

---PAGE BREAK---

118. Richy FF, Pietri G, Moran KA, Senior E, Makaroff LE. Compliance with pharmacotherapy and
direct healthcare costs in patients with Parkinson's disease: a retrospective claims database
analysis. Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2013;11(4):395-406.
119. Haynes RB, Ackloo E, Sahota N, McDonald HP, Yao X. Interventions for enhancing medication
adherence. Cochrane Db Syst Rev. 2008(2).
120. Grosset KA, Grosset DG. Effect of educational intervention on medication timing in Parkinson's
disease: a randomized controlled trial. Bmc Neurol. 2007;7.
121. Daley DJ, Deane KHO, Gray RJ, et al. The use of carer assisted adherence therapy for people
with Parkinson's disease and their carers (CAAT-PARK): study protocol for a randomised
controlled trial. Trials. 2011;12.
122. Chen JJ. Implications for managed care for improving outcomes in Parkinson's disease:
balancing aggressive treatment with appropriate care. Am J Manag Care. 2011;17(12):S322-
327.
123. Berg D, Postuma RB, Bloem B, et al. Time to redefine PD? Introductory statement of the MDS
Task Force on the definition of Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. 2014;29(4):454-462.
124. Clarke CE, Patel S, Ives N, Rick C, Wheatley K, Gray R. Should treatment for Parkinson's disease
start immediately on diagnosis or delayed until functional disability develops? Mov Disord.
2011;26(7):1187-1193.
125. P. Lorenzia, R. Raoa, G. Romanoa, et al. Smart Sensing Systems for the Detection of Human
Motion Disorders. Procedia Engineering. 2015;120: 324–327.
126. Chouvarda IG, Goulis DG, Lambrinoudaki I, Maglaveras N. Connected health and integrated
care: Toward new models for chronic disease management. Maturitas. 2015;82(1):22-27.
127. Council. EB. The Value of Treatment Project 2015-2017. http://www.braincouncil.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/01/EBCdiscussionpaperA4FINAL3.pdf. 2016.
33

---PAGE BREAK---

7. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Central nervous system (CNS)
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Corticobasal degeneration (CBD)
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
Essential tremor (ET)
European Brain Council (EBC)
Hoehn and Yahr (HY)
Idiopatic parkinson’s disease (IPD)
Incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER)
Information and communications technology (ICT)
Levodopa (L-dopa)
L-dopa/carbidopa/entacapone (LCE)
L-dopa/carbidopa (LC)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
Managed care organizations (MCOs)
Monoamine Oxidase Type-B (MAO-B)
Multiple system atrophy (MSA)
Multisystem atrophy (MSA)
Non-motor symptoms scale (NMSS)
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH)
Parkinson’s disease (PD)
Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
Physical therapy (PT)
Positron emission tomography (PET)
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)
Quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs)
Quality of life (QoL)
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
Transcranial sonography (TCS)
Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale (UPDRS)
34

---PAGE BREAK---

