Chunk 1:
Heliyon9(2023)e20595
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Heliyon
journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon
Review article
The role of exosomes in the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease
Qingqing Shia, Wei Kangb, Zhijun Liub, Xiaodong Zhuc,*
aTianjin Medical University, General Hospital, 300000, Tianjin, China
bBeijing Conga Technology Co., LTD., Tianjin Branch, 300000, Tianjin, China
cDepartment of Neurology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical University, General Hospital, 300000, Tianjin, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Parkinson’s disease is a common neurodegenerative disease characterized by intracellular ag-
Exosomes gregation of misfolded α-synuclein as a major pathological hallmark. Exosomes are cell-derived
Parkinson’s disease lipid bilayer membrane vesicles with various components, including proteins, RNA, and lipids,
Biomarkers
that mediate intercellular communication. Currently, exosomes are found to be responsible for
Diagnosis
transporting misfolded proteins from unhealthy neurons to nearby cells, spreading the disease
from cell to cell. Such exosomes can also be found in the cerebrospinal fluid and blood. Thus,
exosomes may serve as a potential tool to detect the pathology of Parkinson’s disease for clinical
diagnosis. In this article, the role and challenges of exosomes in the diagnosis of Parkinson’s
disease are outlined.
1. Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease. Global estimates in 2020 show that more than 9.4 million in-
dividuals living with PD, higher than the 6 million people previously reported in 2016, including China 2.7 million [1,2]. And since
1990, the national morbidity, mortality, and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) of PD have been increasing [3]. The rising prev-
alence of PD has increased the burden on families and society and has caused widespread concern. Environmental factors, such as
exposure to pesticides and other environmental chemicals, high intake o

Chunk 2:
usly reported in 2016, including China 2.7 million [1,2]. And since
1990, the national morbidity, mortality, and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) of PD have been increasing [3]. The rising prev-
alence of PD has increased the burden on families and society and has caused widespread concern. Environmental factors, such as
exposure to pesticides and other environmental chemicals, high intake of dairy products, are associated with an increased risk of PD,
while smoking, caffeine intake, physical exercise, and use of some drugs such as ibuprofen and statins were associated with a reduced
risk [4]. Genetic factors also play a role in the pathogenesis of PD, LRRK2, SNCA, Parkin, PINK1, and DJ1, as well as GBA are the major
causative genes [5].
The death of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra compacta (SNc) and the aggregation of misfolded α-synuclein
(α-syn) in the cytoplasm of residual neurons in the substantia nigra are two of the characteristic hallmarks of PD [6]. Braak proposed
that pathology of PD could be divided into six stages. During stages 1 and 2, also called the presymptomatic stage, misfolded α-syn
confined to the olfactory bulb, medulla oblongata, and pontine tegmentum. In stages 3 and 4, the substantia nigra and other nuclear
grays of the midbrain and basal forebrain are affected and progressively aggravated. At this point the corresponding motor symptoms
are already present. In stages 5 and 6, the pathological process invades the telencephalic cortex [7]. While symptoms of PD are divided
into motor and non-motor symptoms. The main motor symptoms are bradykinesia, tremor, stiffness, and postural instability.
Non-motor symptoms are olfactory impairment, constipation, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD), dementia,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: shiqingqing1026@163.com (Q. Shi), 13802168951@163.com (W. Kang), liuzhijun@jiankangzhan.com (Z. Liu), zxd3516@
tmu.edu.cn (X. Zhu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e2

Chunk 3:
ms are bradykinesia, tremor, stiffness, and postural instability.
Non-motor symptoms are olfactory impairment, constipation, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD), dementia,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: shiqingqing1026@163.com (Q. Shi), 13802168951@163.com (W. Kang), liuzhijun@jiankangzhan.com (Z. Liu), zxd3516@
tmu.edu.cn (X. Zhu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e20595
Received 29 January 2023; Received in revised form 22 July 2023; Accepted 29 September 2023
Availableonline16October2023
2405-8440/© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
depression, and anxiety [8]. Based on the Braak hypothesis, these non-motor symptoms can precede the motor symptoms in PD,
because affected brain regions in the early stages, such as dorsal vagal nucleus, locus coeruleus, and olfactory bulb, are associated with
these non-motor symptoms, which may predict future risk of PD [9].
Early symptoms of PD are uncharacteristic, and the overlapping of early symptoms of atypical Parkinsonian syndromes (APS),
including multiple systems atrophy (MSA), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) corticobasal
degeneration (CBD) frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and some rare disorders, making a definitive diagnosis difficult. According to the
diagnostic criteria established by the International Parkinson’s and Movement Disorders Association, motor symptoms are the core
feature of the PD, defined as bradykinesia combined with rest tremor or rigidity, and at least two supportive criteria, such as significant
beneficial response to dopaminergic treatment and presence of levodopa-induced dyskinesia, and without red flags, such as severe
autonomic failure in the first 5 years of disease [10]. But when classic motor symptoms are present, the mortality of dopaminergic
neurons in the sub

Chunk 4:
 defined as bradykinesia combined with rest tremor or rigidity, and at least two supportive criteria, such as significant
beneficial response to dopaminergic treatment and presence of levodopa-induced dyskinesia, and without red flags, such as severe
autonomic failure in the first 5 years of disease [10]. But when classic motor symptoms are present, the mortality of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra is already more than 50 % and DA concentrations in the striatum are already below 80 % [11]. In
addition, imaging is also utilized to make a clinical aided diagnosis of PD. A systematic review analysis showed that single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) can confirm the presence of dopaminergic neu-
rodegeneration and be used as a clinical support diagnosis, but they cannot reveal the preceding disease process [12]. Another sys-
tematic review analysis revealed that fMRI and 18F-FDG PET may be able to predict brain alterations in prodromal PD, but the results
are not very compelling due to inconsistencies between studies [13]. Thus, there is no imaging biomarker suitable for a definitive early
diagnosis of PD [14]. Braak suggested that the pathogenesis of PD may be first initiated in the olfactory structures and the gut enteric
nerves, spreading to the substantia nigra after years or even decades, causing dopaminergic neuron death and PD motor dysfunction
[15]. This implies that pathological changes precede the appearance of motor symptoms and that by the time PD is definitively
diagnosed, disease progression is already severe. Therefore, it is important to develop a new biomarker capable of early detection of
PD. We need biomarkers that can reflect early pathological changes in PD to help us perform early diagnosis. Based on this view,
exosomes released by specific neuronal cells become promising potential biomarkers. Recently, exosomes were found to be involved in
interneuronal and neuron–glia communication, a

Chunk 5:
 severe. Therefore, it is important to develop a new biomarker capable of early detection of
PD. We need biomarkers that can reflect early pathological changes in PD to help us perform early diagnosis. Based on this view,
exosomes released by specific neuronal cells become promising potential biomarkers. Recently, exosomes were found to be involved in
interneuronal and neuron–glia communication, and carry misfolded α-syn from the parent cells, spreading the disease from cell to cell
[16,17]. Several studies have shown that Central Nervous System (CNS)-derived exosomes are free to cross the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) [18] and can be isolated from serum or plasma by specific neural markers, thus providing a “window” for detecting brain
pathology, which holds promise for non-invasive analysis of brain biomarkers [19]. This offered a new option for the early diagnosis of
PD.
2. Exosome
Exosomes are small intracellular membrane-based vesicles, which have a size ranging from 40 nm to 100 nm and serve as vehicles
to carry different types of cellular cargo such as proteins, lipids and nucleic acids to the recipient cells [20]. Exosomes are generated
from multivesicular bodies (MVBs). The invagination of the cell membrane forms a cup-like structure that encapsulates cell surface
proteins and soluble proteins associated with the extracellular environment. These vesicles fuse to form early sorting endosomes,
which gradually become late sorting endosomes. The invagination of late sorting endosomal membranes produces many small vesicles,
which are called intraluminal vesicles (ILVs). At this time, these late sorting endosomes are known as MVBs. Then the MVBs can fuse
with the plasma membrane to release the ILVs as exosomes or fuse with lysosomes for degradation [21]. Exosomes are secreted by all
cell types, such as neurons, mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and immune cells, and can be found in most body fluids, including blood,
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), saliva, and urine [22].
Exoso

Chunk 6:
this time, these late sorting endosomes are known as MVBs. Then the MVBs can fuse
with the plasma membrane to release the ILVs as exosomes or fuse with lysosomes for degradation [21]. Exosomes are secreted by all
cell types, such as neurons, mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and immune cells, and can be found in most body fluids, including blood,
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), saliva, and urine [22].
Exosomes contain various cargoes including specific lipids, proteins and genetic material, such as DNA and RNA [23]. Lipids are the
important components of exosomes, not only for their structural role in the exosome membrane, but also as crucial players in the
formation and release of exosomes into the extracellular environment. Lipids in exosomes have a differential distribution between the
inner and outer membranes. It is reported that sphingolipids and phosphatidylcholine are mainly found in the outer membrane, while
other lipids are mainly present in the inner membrane [24]. The protein components of exosome are primarily divided into two
categories, one is the common components, the other is specific components. The common components mainly include heat shock
protein 70 (HSP70), heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), CD63, CD81, tumor susceptibility gene 101 (Tsg101), ALG2-interacting protein X
(Alix), membrane transport and fusion-related proteins (Rab, GTPases), which are involved in the process of exosome formation and
secretion [25]. The specific components are tightly linked to their parent cells. For example, mast cell-derived exosomes expressing
MHC-II, CD86, lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) induce the prolif-
+
eration of B and T cells [26]. PD-L1 on melanoma-derived exosomes inhibits CD8 T cell anti-tumor function in vivo and promotes
tumor growth [27]. In addition, exosomes also carry genetic material, such as DNA and RNA, that can be transferred between cells and
regulate gene expression in recipient cells [2

Chunk 7:
ociated antigen 1 (LFA-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) induce the prolif-
+
eration of B and T cells [26]. PD-L1 on melanoma-derived exosomes inhibits CD8 T cell anti-tumor function in vivo and promotes
tumor growth [27]. In addition, exosomes also carry genetic material, such as DNA and RNA, that can be transferred between cells and
regulate gene expression in recipient cells [28,29].
Exosomes play an important role in the transmission of molecules between neighboring cells as a tool for intercellular commu-
nication [30]. Thus, exosomescan contribute to the development and progression of different diseases, which is also the basis for their
role in the pathogenesis of PD. The accumulation of α-syn in neurons is a hallmark of PD. Exosomes have been reported to convey
misfolded α-syn from damaged neurons to normal neurons, leading to protein accumulation and cell death [31]. This process is
thought to be associated with autophagic damage. Evidence from post-mortem patient brain tissue and rodent models of PD clearly
support the idea that autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP) damage is present [32]. Georgia Minakaki et al. further investigated that
damage to ALP increases the amount of α-syn in neural-derived exosomes and that exosomes are able to transfer α-syn from cell to cell
in vivo [33]. In addition, compared with free α-synuclein-oligomers, α-synuclein-oligomers encapsulated in exosomes are more easily
internalized into the recipient cells [17,34]. Huang et al. found that injection of neural-derived exosomes from PD patients into the
2

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
striatum of mice could induce dopaminergic neurons degeneration and motor deficits [35]. Furthermore, inflammatory responses,
including glial cell activation and peripheral immune cell infiltration, are also associated with the pathogenesis of PD. The release of
exosomes seems to be closely related to the inflammatory response. It has been shown that exosom

Chunk 8:
Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
striatum of mice could induce dopaminergic neurons degeneration and motor deficits [35]. Furthermore, inflammatory responses,
including glial cell activation and peripheral immune cell infiltration, are also associated with the pathogenesis of PD. The release of
exosomes seems to be closely related to the inflammatory response. It has been shown that exosomes from inflamed macrophages can
induce the activation of microglia and astrocytes, stimulate proinflammatory cytokine expression and participate in the pathological
progression of PD [36]. Furthermore, inflammatory factors could enhance α-syn aggregation induced by exosome, leading to enhanced
α-syn toxicity [17]. Han et al. observed a significant increase in TNF-α and IL-1β levels in serum exosomes of PD patients. Then,
Table 1
Summary of exosome-associated biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease.
Potential Biomarkers Exosomes Source Patients ROC analysis Reference
Protein α-syn CSF PD =76 AUC =0.741 [38]
HC =58
Plasma PD =267 AUC =0.654 [39]
HC =215
Plasma PD =36 AUC =0.710 [40]
HC =36
Plasma PD =43 AUC =0.800 [41]
RBD =20
HC =21
Plasma PD =78 AUC =0.761 [42]
RBD =153
HC =63
Plasma PD =93 AUC =0.616 [43]
HC =85
Plasma PD =51 AUC =0.674 [44]
HC =50
Serum PD =38 AUC =0.675 [45]
ET =21
HC =18
Serum PD =275 AUC =0.860 [46]
HC =144
Saliva PD =18 AUC =? [47]
HC =?
DJ-1 Plasma PD =39 AUC =0.703 [48]
HC =40
Urine PD =27 AUC =? [49]
HC =27
LRRK2 Urine/CSF PD =65 AUC =? [50]
HC =67
Urine PD =79 AUC =? [51]
HC =79
Urine PD =41 AUC =0.844 [52]
HC =35
Tau Plasma PD =91 AUC =0.607 [53]
AD =106
HC =106
AChE Plasma PD =34 AUC =0.709 [54]
HC =29
MiRNA MiR-153 CSF PD =78 aAUC =0.990 [55]
MiR-409–3p AD =53
HC =35
MiR-375 Plasma PD =7 AUC =? [56]
MiR-1468–5p AD =5
MiR-576–5p HC =35
MiR-197–3p
Let-7e-5p
MiR-331–5p Plasma PD =52 bAUC =0.898 [57]
MiR-505 HC =48
MiR-19b Serum PD =109 cAUC =0.946 [58]
MiR-195 HC =40
MiR-24
LncRNA Linc-POU3F3 Plasma PD =93 AUC =0.763 [43]
HC =85
Lnc- MKRN2-42:1 Plasma 

Chunk 9:
106
AChE Plasma PD =34 AUC =0.709 [54]
HC =29
MiRNA MiR-153 CSF PD =78 aAUC =0.990 [55]
MiR-409–3p AD =53
HC =35
MiR-375 Plasma PD =7 AUC =? [56]
MiR-1468–5p AD =5
MiR-576–5p HC =35
MiR-197–3p
Let-7e-5p
MiR-331–5p Plasma PD =52 bAUC =0.898 [57]
MiR-505 HC =48
MiR-19b Serum PD =109 cAUC =0.946 [58]
MiR-195 HC =40
MiR-24
LncRNA Linc-POU3F3 Plasma PD =93 AUC =0.763 [43]
HC =85
Lnc- MKRN2-42:1 Plasma PD =24 AUC =? [59]
HC =11
AD Alzheimer’s disease; AUC area under the curve; CSF cerebrospinal fluid; ET essential tremor; HC healthy control; PD Parkinson’s disease; RBD
rapid eye movement behavior disorder; ROC receiver operating characteristic.
a Model based on miR-153 and miR-409–3p.
b Model based on miR-505.
c Model based on miR-19b miR-195 and miR-24.
3

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
injection of serum exosomes from PD patients into the striatum of mice caused α-syn accumulation, microglia activation, and dopa-
minergic neuron degeneration, providing evidence that exosome-mediated inflammatory cytokine transport further damages dopa-
minergic neurons [37].
In this review, we focus on the role of exosomes in the diagnosis of PD and its research progress. And whether exosomes can
distinguish PD from atypical Parkinsonian syndrome is essential for the accuracy of PD diagnosis. Table 1 summarizes the biomarkers
in exosomes isolated from different biofluids.
3. Role of exosomes in PD diagnosis
3.1. Protein
3.1.1. α-syn
α-Syn is a highly soluble unfolded protein, however it aggregates into filaments and becomes insoluble in PD. Aggregation of α-syn,
also called Lewy bodies, is a hallmark pathological feature of PD and other α-synucleinopathies. It is reported that misfolded α-syn may
also exhibit prion-like properties [60]. While exosomes may be one of the tools for its spread. Recent studies have indicated that
misfolded α-syn can be encapsulated in exosomes, released from neurons to extracellular fluid, and spread among neurons, which has a
gre

Chunk 10:
 called Lewy bodies, is a hallmark pathological feature of PD and other α-synucleinopathies. It is reported that misfolded α-syn may
also exhibit prion-like properties [60]. While exosomes may be one of the tools for its spread. Recent studies have indicated that
misfolded α-syn can be encapsulated in exosomes, released from neurons to extracellular fluid, and spread among neurons, which has a
great impact on the pathological progress of PD [61]. Therefore, α-syn in exosomes has become one of the candidate biomarkers for the
diagnosis of PD.
CSF is a kind of clear, colorless fluid that bathes the CNS as an ideal source of biomarkers for PD. Stuendl et al. found lower levels of
α-syn in CSF exosomes from patients with early PD compared to healthy controls, which may be useful as a potential biomarker [38].
They also demonstrated CSF exosomes from PD patients contain a pathogenic α-syn that can act as a seed to spread between cells,
which could induce oligomerization of soluble α-syn in target cells and participates in disease progression.
However, CSF collection can be invasive compared to other body fluids. Therefore, blood may be a better choice. L1cell adhesion
molecular (L1CAM) is a cell adhesion molecule expressed primarily in the nervous system and present on the surface of neural-derived
exosomes [62]. Shi et al. established an immunoaffinity capturing protocol to isolate L1CAM-containing exosomes in plasma,
providing a theoretical basis for searching CNS exosome in blood [39]. They also indicated that the level of α-syn in CNS-derived
exosomes in the plasma was significantly increased in PD patients compared with controls and the diagnostic performance was
comparable to that of CSF α-syn. In addition, CNS-derived exosomal α-syn showed a significant association with disease severity,
whereas CSF α-syn did not, suggesting that CNS-derived exosomal α-syn, rather than CSF α-syn, may be useful for monitoring or
predicting disease progression. Zheng et al. suggeste

Chunk 11:
ficantly increased in PD patients compared with controls and the diagnostic performance was
comparable to that of CSF α-syn. In addition, CNS-derived exosomal α-syn showed a significant association with disease severity,
whereas CSF α-syn did not, suggesting that CNS-derived exosomal α-syn, rather than CSF α-syn, may be useful for monitoring or
predicting disease progression. Zheng et al. suggested that the different types of α-syn (oligomeric α-syn and the Ser 129 phosphor-
ylated α-syn (p-α-syn)) might be helpful in the diagnosis of PD [40]. Furthermore, Niu and colleagues, through a longitudinal study,
demonstrated that the α-syn levels in plasma neuronal exosomes were correlated with progression of motor symptoms [41]. Idiopathic
rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) has been reported as a prodromal stage of PD, which may provide assistance in the
early diagnosis of PD [63]. Recently, Yan et al. found that both plasma exosomal α-syn and plasma neural-derived exosomal α-syn were
elevated in PD patients compared to healthy controls, whereas only plasma neural-derived exosomal α-syn were elevated in the RBD
group [42]. Therefore, α-syn levels in plasma neural-derived exosomes are useful for the diagnosis of early PD. However, Shim et al.
found that the levels of plasma exosomal α-syn had no significant difference between PD and healthy controls [54]. Similarly, Si et al.
also found that the level of α-syn in CNS-derived exosomes in serum samples was lower in PD patients than healthy controls [45].
In addition to the use of exosomal α-syn to distinguish PD from healthy controls, a more detailed study was conducted by Si et al.
They evaluated the levels of α-syn in CNS-derived exosomes in serum samples of PD with different motor types [45]. They divided
patients with PD into the tremor-dominant (TD) group and the non-tremor-dominant (NTD) group. As a result, CSF-derived exosomal
α-syn was significantly lower in the NTD group compared to the TD group. Furt

Chunk 12:
healthy controls, a more detailed study was conducted by Si et al.
They evaluated the levels of α-syn in CNS-derived exosomes in serum samples of PD with different motor types [45]. They divided
patients with PD into the tremor-dominant (TD) group and the non-tremor-dominant (NTD) group. As a result, CSF-derived exosomal
α-syn was significantly lower in the NTD group compared to the TD group. Furthermore, the performance of CNS-derived exosomal
α-syn was found to moderately aid in PD diagnosis and had a potential to diagnose NTD. Therefore, CNS-derived exosomal α-syn in the
serum may help in the early diagnosis of PD patients and the identification of different motor types in PD.
Besides exosomal α-syn in blood, exosomal α-syn in saliva can also be used as a diagnostic marker for PD. Rani et al. found that
salivary exosomal p-α-syn levels are significantly higher in PD patients than healthy controls with the higher abundance of neuronal
origin salivary exosomes in PD patients [47]. These novel findings suggested the utility of exosomes in the saliva as an accessible source
of biomarker discovery for PD. However, the mechanism of exosomal α-syn release from salivary glands needs to be investigated.
Since α-syn is a pathological hallmark of PD, it can be very helpful in the diagnosis of PD. However, there are still differences in the
current assay outcomes, probably due to variations in the type of biofluid or the technique of exosome isolation. Therefore, we need to
conduct more studies to address these issues. Exosomes of neural origin are still considered a better choice because it can reflect the
state of the brain. In summary, α-syn in plasma neuronal exosomes can be used as a promising biomarker for PD diagnosis.
3.1.2. DJ-1
DJ-1 is an antioxidant protein that is automatically oxidized upon exposure to oxidative stress, protecting cell contents and
regulating gene expression for antioxidant defense [64]. DJ-1 has previously been considered to be linked to the me

Chunk 13:
ecause it can reflect the
state of the brain. In summary, α-syn in plasma neuronal exosomes can be used as a promising biomarker for PD diagnosis.
3.1.2. DJ-1
DJ-1 is an antioxidant protein that is automatically oxidized upon exposure to oxidative stress, protecting cell contents and
regulating gene expression for antioxidant defense [64]. DJ-1 has previously been considered to be linked to the mechanism of PD
[65]. Subsequently, in order to explore its potential as a biomarker, many researchers began to investigate the variation of DJ-1 levels
in different biological fluids, such as cerebrospinal fluid [66], plasma [67], serum [68] and urine [69]. For example, J. Jang et al.
observed significantly higher, 2-fold, oxidized DJ-1 (OxiDJ-1) levels in the urine of Korean PD patients than in non-PD controls [69].
Zhao et al. measured plasma levels of DJ-I in PD patients and healthy controls. However, there was no significant difference be-
tween the two groups [48]. Then, they isolated neural-derived exosomes from plasma and found that the concentrations of DJ-1 were
4

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
significantly higher in PD patients compared with healthy controls. Moreover, there were significant positive correlations between
DJ-1 and α-syn in plasma neural-derived exosomes in PD patients and healthy controls. However, there was no relationship between
the two proteins and disease progression. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis performance of DJ-1 in plasma
neural-derived exosomes was identified to be moderate (area under the curve (AUC) =0.703, sensitivity =79.5 %, specificity =57.5
%). However, the combination of these two proteins did not perform a significant discrimination (AUC =0.714, sensitivity =82.1 %,
specificity =52.5 %). Currently, studies on DJ-1 in exosomes are lacking. Further studies should be conducted with larger patient
cohorts in order to corroborate the significance of these findings and the rela

Chunk 14:
e curve (AUC) =0.703, sensitivity =79.5 %, specificity =57.5
%). However, the combination of these two proteins did not perform a significant discrimination (AUC =0.714, sensitivity =82.1 %,
specificity =52.5 %). Currently, studies on DJ-1 in exosomes are lacking. Further studies should be conducted with larger patient
cohorts in order to corroborate the significance of these findings and the relationship of these biomarkers and disease progression.
In addition, proteomic analysis of urinary exosomes also reported the presence of DJ-1 [70,71]. Dong Hwan Ho et al. investigated
the potential use of exosomes in urine as a diagnostic tool for PD. They compared levels of DJ-1 in urine exosomes isolated from Korean
PD patients and non-PD controls [49]. The results showed that DJ-1 protein was increased ~1.7-fold in male PD patients compared to
male non-PD controls. Thus, only in males, DJ-1 levels in urinary exosomes have potential as a diagnostic biomarker for PD.
Overall, DJ-1 is not yet considered to be a useful biomarker. On the one hand, DJ-1 has a moderate diagnostic performance, and has
not been found to be associated with disease progression. On the other hand, we do not know the exact reason for the gender dif-
ferences of DJ-1 at present. To address these issues, further research should be conducted in a larger patient cohort.
3.1.3. LRRK2
In 90 % patients of PD, no genetic or environmental causes have been identified, these patients are known as idiopathic PD (iPD),
the remaining 10 % have a definite genetic involvement and show a tendency for familial onset. Among them, mutations in leucine-
rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most commonly known cause of late-onset PD [72]. LRRK2 is also the single gene most associated
with PD, having only been identified by researchers in 2004 [73]. Researchers have believed that the most common missense mutation
in LRRK2 causes overactivity of LRRK2 protein kinase, which is associated with the onset of PD [74].
In 2013, Fr

Chunk 15:
m, mutations in leucine-
rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most commonly known cause of late-onset PD [72]. LRRK2 is also the single gene most associated
with PD, having only been identified by researchers in 2004 [73]. Researchers have believed that the most common missense mutation
in LRRK2 causes overactivity of LRRK2 protein kinase, which is associated with the onset of PD [74].
In 2013, Fraser et al. have demonstrated that LRRK2 protein can be detected in urinary and CSF exosomes. However, LRRK2 levels
in exosomes are unable to differentiate between PD patients and healthy controls [75]. In 2016, this team found in the first small pilot
cohort of patients that PD patients with the G2019S-LRRK2 mutation (LRRK2+/PD+) had approximately 5-fold elevated Ser(P)-1292
LRRK2 protein in urinary exosomes compared to healthy controls and PD patients without the G0219S-LRRK2 mutation
(LRRK2-/PD+) [52]. Later, in a larger cohort of patients, the same trend was found in male LRRK2+/PD +patients, but age-matched
male mutation carriers without PD (LRRK2+/PD-) were only 2.2-fold higher than healthy controls and lower than LRRK2+/PD +
patients (p <0.001). And Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels in urinary exosomes were predictive of the diagnosis of PD in mutation carriers
(AUC =0.844) [52]. These results suggest that elevated Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in urinary exosomes predicts LRRK2 mutation status and
PD risk in LRRK2 mutation carriers.
Next, Wang et al. quantified levels of Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2, total LRRK2, and other exosome proteins in urine from 132 subjects and
in CSF from 82 subjects in a novel cohort with and without the G2019S-LRRK2 mutation, with and without PD [50]. They found that
male LRRK2+/PD-patients had intermediate urine exosomes Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels compared to male LRRK2+/PD +patients with
PD and controls. However, this trend was not found in females. Moreover, in LRRK2 mutation carriers, the levels of Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2
in CSF exosomes may be much higher, on average ten 

Chunk 16:
cohort with and without the G2019S-LRRK2 mutation, with and without PD [50]. They found that
male LRRK2+/PD-patients had intermediate urine exosomes Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels compared to male LRRK2+/PD +patients with
PD and controls. However, this trend was not found in females. Moreover, in LRRK2 mutation carriers, the levels of Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2
in CSF exosomes may be much higher, on average ten times, than in urinary exosomes. But LRRK2 levels in CSF exosomes failed to
discriminate LRRK2 mutation carriers from non-carriers, or PD from controls.
However, according to findings by researchers at the University of Pittsburgh, LRRK2 plays a major role in the development of PD
regardless of mutations, and patients with iPD without mutations also have over-activation of LRRK2 protein and impaired autophagy
in neurons, leading to abnormal accumulation of α-syn, which is involved in the development of PD [76]. In 2016, Fraser et al.
compared Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels from biobanked urine samples with clinical data in PD and controls [51]. The results revealed that
Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels were higher in PD patients than in controls. And, gender affected Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels, with male
having higher Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels than female. They also found that Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels in urinary exosome correlated
with the severity of cognitive impairment.
Although the findings mentioned showed increased levels of Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in urinary exosomes of PD patients, it is not yet
certain that Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 is an appropriate biomarker, as many questions remain to be answered. For example, the relationship
between Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels and gender, as well as the source of urinary exosomes is unknown. Studies are still to be done to
validate whether Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in exosomes can be used to diagnose PD or to assess the severity of PD and how that correlates
with motor and non-motor symptoms.
3.1.4. Tau
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein (MAP) that is abundant i

Chunk 17:
or example, the relationship
between Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 levels and gender, as well as the source of urinary exosomes is unknown. Studies are still to be done to
validate whether Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in exosomes can be used to diagnose PD or to assess the severity of PD and how that correlates
with motor and non-motor symptoms.
3.1.4. Tau
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein (MAP) that is abundant in the axons of neurons where it stabilizes microtubule bundles
[77]. Tau protein plays a key role in tauopathies, especially Alzheimer’s disease [78]. Notably, several studies have shown that tau
gene (MAPT) are found to be associated with the risk of sporadic PD [79–81]. A study of the human postmortem striatum found that PD
patients had higher levels of tau protein than healthy controls [79]. While loss of tau expression significantly delayed the progression
of α-synucleinopathy disease, as evidenced by a significant reduction in histopathological markers of neurodegeneration [82].
In 2016, Shi et al. investigated potential of tau in plasma neural-derived exosomes as a diagnostic marker [53]. They administered
radioactively labeled and unlabeled tau intracerebroventricularly in wild-type and tau knock-out mice, respectively. They have
demonstrated that tau can be transported from the brain into blood, that tau can also be detected in mouse plasma neural-derived
exosomes, and that the exosome-associated tau was mainly inside the exosomes, but not on the surface. They first demonstrated in
animal experiments that tau can be transported to the plasma through exosomes. Then, they measured tau in whole plasma and plasma
neural-derived exosomes from 91 PD, 106 AD and 106 healthy controls using Simoa assay. The results indicated that tau in plasma
5

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
neural-derived exosomes was significantly higher in PD patients compared to healthy controls. In contrast, whole plasma tau con-
centrations were significantly higher in AD 

Chunk 18:
sured tau in whole plasma and plasma
neural-derived exosomes from 91 PD, 106 AD and 106 healthy controls using Simoa assay. The results indicated that tau in plasma
5

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
neural-derived exosomes was significantly higher in PD patients compared to healthy controls. In contrast, whole plasma tau con-
centrations were significantly higher in AD compared to PD and healthy controls. ROC curve analysis showed that tau in plasma
neural-derived exosomes was modestly predictive in distinguishing PD from healthy controls (AUC =0.607, sensitivity =57.8 %,
specificity =65.1 %).
To sum up, exosomal tau is not highly effective in the diagnosis of PD, and there is a scarcity of literature on the subject. The
diagnostic effect of tau combined with other candidate species such as α-syn on PD can be investigated in the future.
3.1.5. Other proteins
Recently, it has been observed that degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system is found to be linked to cholinergic
denervation in patients with PD [83,84]. By using PET to measure acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity, there is severe cholinergic
denervation in the brains of PD patients compared to AD [85]. Moreover, the uptake of 11C donepezil by peripheral organs was
significantly reduced in PD patients, indicating a decrease in AChE in the peripheral system [86]. In conclusion, AChE has been
extensively associated with pathophysiological processes of PD in the peripheral organs and the brain. As mentioned previously Kyu
Hwan Shim et al. found that the levels of exosomal α-syn had no significant difference between PD and healthy controls. However,
exosomal AChE activity was significantly lower in PD patients compared to healthy controls and was negatively correlated with disease
severity [54]. Then, it seems that AChE may also have potential as a diagnostic biomarker for PD.
In a case-control study, Jiang et al. explored the proteomic profile of serum exosomes in healthy 

Chunk 19:
d no significant difference between PD and healthy controls. However,
exosomal AChE activity was significantly lower in PD patients compared to healthy controls and was negatively correlated with disease
severity [54]. Then, it seems that AChE may also have potential as a diagnostic biomarker for PD.
In a case-control study, Jiang et al. explored the proteomic profile of serum exosomes in healthy subjects and PD patients at
different stages, and the results revealed the development of PD-specific proteins [87]. They applied mass spectrometry with label-free
quantitative proteomics to analyze exosomal proteins and identified a total of 429 proteins, 14 of which were significantly different in
patients with mild and severe PD. In PD patients, seven proteins, including clusterin, complement C1r subcomponent, apolipoprotein D
(ApoD), were progressively increased from mild to severe PD. In contrast, seven proteins, including complement C1q subcomponent,
myosin-reactive immunoglobulin kappa chain, Ig kappa chain VIII region, were progressively downregulated in serum exosomes from
mild PD to severe PD. Similarly, Kitamura et al. reported that the levels of clusterin, complement C1r subcomponent, and apolipo-
protein A1 in plasma exosomes in PD patients were significantly decreased compared to healthy controls, and apolipoprotein A1 was
associated with disease progression [88]. Moreover, Anastasi et al. further extracted plasma neural-derived exosomes for proteomics
analysis and identified 23 proteins associated with PD for their potential as biomarkers [89]. Among these 23 proteins, Parkinson’s
disease protein 7 (PARK7), amyloid P component, clusterin, and stromal cell-derived factor 1 (CXCL12) may be biomarker candidates
for the diagnosis of PD.
Recently, Jang et al. used a novel method called magnetic transferrin nanoparticles (MTNs) assay to extract brain-derived exosomes
from serum and performed proteomic analysis to explore the value of brain-derived exosomes protein 

Chunk 20:
s, Parkinson’s
disease protein 7 (PARK7), amyloid P component, clusterin, and stromal cell-derived factor 1 (CXCL12) may be biomarker candidates
for the diagnosis of PD.
Recently, Jang et al. used a novel method called magnetic transferrin nanoparticles (MTNs) assay to extract brain-derived exosomes
from serum and performed proteomic analysis to explore the value of brain-derived exosomes protein profiles as biomarkers of
neurodegenerative diseases [90]. The results showed that compared to dementia and multiple sclerosis (MS) groups, six proteins, such
as Noelin and Fibrinogen alpha chain, were abundant in the PD group, highly involved in the hydrogen peroxide catabolic process, and
10 proteins including clusterin, Filamin-A, Tenascin, Cadherin-13) was less abundant in PD, closely associated with lipids metabolism
and complement activation. These proteins may be useful in distinguishing PD from other neurodegenerative diseases.
The mentioned studies suggest that proteomic approaches are feasible in exosomes analysis and may identify new candidate
biomarkers for PD. However, some challenges still remain, for example, non-specific proteins in body fluids that bind to exosomes can
affect the results, and the low abundance of disease-associated proteins [91]. Therefore, more research needs to be invested in
developing more advanced methods to overcome these obstacles in the future.
3.2. RNA
3.2.1. miRNA
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNA molecules, about 21–24 nucleotides in length encoded by endogenous
genes that down-regulate mRNA through RNA interference (RNAi) and have a variety of important regulatory roles in cells. MiRNAs
play an important epigenetic role in many diseases and can be overexpressed or suppressed in different diseases [92]. MiRNAs are
stable in plasma, serum and other body fluids and can bind to proteins or be encapsulated in vesicles, thus protecting them from
degradation [93]. This also laid a foundation for detecting miRNAs in

Chunk 21:
(RNAi) and have a variety of important regulatory roles in cells. MiRNAs
play an important epigenetic role in many diseases and can be overexpressed or suppressed in different diseases [92]. MiRNAs are
stable in plasma, serum and other body fluids and can bind to proteins or be encapsulated in vesicles, thus protecting them from
degradation [93]. This also laid a foundation for detecting miRNAs in body fluids or vesicles as biomarkers.
In 2015 Gui et al. for the first time, demonstrated the presence of miRNAs in CSF exosomes from patients with PD and AD [55]. The
results showed that 16 miRNA expressions were upregulated and 11 miRNA expressions were downregulated in PD patients compared
to healthy controls. Validated in independent samples, miR-1 and miR-19b-3p were significantly reduced in CSF exosomes from PD
patients, whereas miR-153, miR-409–3p, miR-10a-5p and let-7g-3p were significantly overexpressed. They also performed DIANA
mirPath analysis of these differentially expressed miRNAs and found that neurotrophin signaling, mTOR signaling, ubiquitin mediated
proteolysis, dopaminergic synapses and glutamatergic synapses were the most significant pathways enriched in PD-miRNA patterns,
suggesting that these biological pathways are involved in the development of PD. ROC curve analysis showed that miR-409–3p could
achieve the highest area under the curve for a single miRNA (AUC =0.970). And, the combination of miR-153 and miR-409–3p
significantly improved the performance of discrimination (AUC =0.990).
Nie et al. reported a wide range of altered exosomal miRNA expression levels detected in the plasma of both AD and PD patients by
small RNA sequencing [56]. They found that 8 miRNAs were differentially expressed between AD and PD, 6 miRNAs were elevated in
PD and 2 miRNAs were increased in AD. Among them, let-7e-5p increased in PD samples and decreased in AD samples, suggesting that
let-7e-5p may be a helpful biomarker to distinguish neurodegenerative disease subtypes

Chunk 22:
vels detected in the plasma of both AD and PD patients by
small RNA sequencing [56]. They found that 8 miRNAs were differentially expressed between AD and PD, 6 miRNAs were elevated in
PD and 2 miRNAs were increased in AD. Among them, let-7e-5p increased in PD samples and decreased in AD samples, suggesting that
let-7e-5p may be a helpful biomarker to distinguish neurodegenerative disease subtypes. Another study by Yao and colleagues
analyzed the potential value of plasma exosomal miRNAs as biomarkers of PD and showed that miRNAs including miR-331–5p (AUC
6

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
=0.849) and miR-505 (AUC =0.898) may serve as biomarkers of PD [57].
Many studies have been performed to find miRNA-based biomarkers for diagnosing PD, which identified several miRNAs that are
significantly altered in PD. Nevertheless, there are some discrepancies between the results of these studies [94–96]. Cao et al. selected
24 previously reported miRNAs in serum or plasma that could serve as clinical biomarkers for PD, examined the levels of these miRNAs
in serum exosomes, and reassessed their feasibility for clinical application, exploring their potential as biomarkers for PD [58]. They
collected serum samples from 109 PD patients and 40 age- and sex-matched healthy controls to detect miRNA in serum exosomes. They
only observed consistent results for three miRNAs, with miR-19b downregulated as well as miR-195 and miR-24 upregulated in serum
exosomes from PD patients. Then, the validated gene targets for miR-195, miR-24 and miR-19b were searched using the Targetscan
tool, and among these targets, Parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (PARK2; miR-19b), LRRK2/PARK8 (miR-19b) and
ATP13A2/PARK9 (miR-24 and miR-195) were found to be closely associated with neuronal apoptosis, regeneration and the neuro-
degenerative processes of PD. ROC curve analysis showed that the AUC for miR-19b, miR-24 and miR-195 were 0.753, 0.908 and
0.697, respectively, compared

Chunk 23:
argetscan
tool, and among these targets, Parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (PARK2; miR-19b), LRRK2/PARK8 (miR-19b) and
ATP13A2/PARK9 (miR-24 and miR-195) were found to be closely associated with neuronal apoptosis, regeneration and the neuro-
degenerative processes of PD. ROC curve analysis showed that the AUC for miR-19b, miR-24 and miR-195 were 0.753, 0.908 and
0.697, respectively, compared to the controls. The AUC for the three-miRNA panel was 0.946 (sensitivity =85.3 %, specificity =90.0
%). This also confirms that as a potential serum-based biomarker, the expression levels of miR-19b, miR-24 and miR-195 may
contribute to the diagnosis of PD patients.
Many studies on miRNAs in exosomes as biomarkers remains in progress. However, the large discrepancy between study results
may be due to the limitations and variability of all techniques leading to the fact that no standard procedure for exosomal miRNA
extraction is currently established, making it difficult to identify potential biomarkers for PD. On the other hand, few studies have
examined the differences between miRNAs in exosomes of central nervous system origin in PD and healthy controls. Thus, more
detailed studies and more advanced technology are in need and a standardized method and source is necessary before it is possible to
consider exosomal miRNA as biomarkers of PD in the clinical setting.
3.2.2. lncRNA
LncRNA is one of the non-coding RNAs with a length generally defined as longer than 200 nucleotides. In particular, lncRNA has
been shown to play important roles in epigenetic control, transcription, translation, regulation of RNA metabolism, as well as in stem
cell maintenance and differentiation, cell autophagy and apoptosis, and embryonic development [97]. In addition, lncRNA plays an
important role in brain development, neuronal function and maintenance, and are closely related to the pathophysiology of neuro-
degenerative diseases such as PD, AD, HD and ALS [98]. Here, we focus on the diagnos

Chunk 24:
slation, regulation of RNA metabolism, as well as in stem
cell maintenance and differentiation, cell autophagy and apoptosis, and embryonic development [97]. In addition, lncRNA plays an
important role in brain development, neuronal function and maintenance, and are closely related to the pathophysiology of neuro-
degenerative diseases such as PD, AD, HD and ALS [98]. Here, we focus on the diagnostic role of lncRNA in exosomes in PD.
In 2020, Zou et al. recruited 93 PD patients and 85 controls to evaluate the severity of PD using several scales, isolated L1CAM-
containing exosomes from human plasma using antibody-coated superparamagnetic microbeads, and analyzed the lncRNA in the
exosomes by microarray [43]. The results showed that Linc-POU3F3 expression was highly upregulated in PD patients and had the
most stable detection density. β-Glucocerebrosidase (GCase), a lysosomal enzyme encoded by the GBA1 gene, has been investigated to
be associated with α-syn protein stability and plays a key role in the pathogenesis of PD [99]. And there was a significant correlation
among L1CAM exosomal Linc-POU3F3 levels, plasma GCase activity, and PD severity. However, based on the difference in
Linc-POU3F3, the separation between PD patients and controls was low (AUC =0.763). When binding LINC-POU3F3 and α-syn in
L1CAM exosomes and plasma GCase activity, the separation was increased (AUC = 0.824). Therefore, the L1CAM exosomal
Linc-POU3F3 may be a diagnostic biomarker for PD.
Wang et al. have examined the expression differences for lncRNA in plasma exosomes of patients with PD compared with healthy
individuals, looking for lncRNAs that may be involved in the pathogenesis of PD [59]. They evaluated lncRNA levels extracted from
plasma exosomes by next-generation sequencing and real-time quantitative PCR, resulting in 15 up-regulated and 24 down-regulated
exosomal lncRNAs in the PD group. According to the lncRNA differential expression results, MSTRG.336210.1 and lnc-MKRN2-42:1
were 

Chunk 25:
th healthy
individuals, looking for lncRNAs that may be involved in the pathogenesis of PD [59]. They evaluated lncRNA levels extracted from
plasma exosomes by next-generation sequencing and real-time quantitative PCR, resulting in 15 up-regulated and 24 down-regulated
exosomal lncRNAs in the PD group. According to the lncRNA differential expression results, MSTRG.336210.1 and lnc-MKRN2-42:1
were highly expressed in healthy controls, whereas MSTRG.242001.1 and MSTRG.169261.1 were highly expressed in PD patients.
Based on bioinformatic analysis, lnc-MKRN2-42:1 was selected for further study because some of its target genes were also
down-regulated in the plasma of 24 PD patients and 11 healthy controls. Moreover, the expression level of lnc-MKRN2-42:1 was
positively correlated with the severity of dyskinesia and dysarthria, but not with other clinical symptoms, suggesting that
lnc-MKRN2-42:1 may be associated with the development of PD. However, the sample size of the study was too small and the results
were not convincing and need to be validated in a large sample. In addition, the mechanism of lnc-MKRN2-42:1 in PD can be studied in
cellular or animal models.
Currently, miRNAs have been the main RNA biomarkers studied in exosomes for PD, while lncRNAs have been less investigated.
The above findings suggest that LncRNA expression levels differ between PD patients and healthy controls and may be a candidate
marker for PD. However, the results are relatively few and a large number of studies are still needed to confirm this deduction. In
addition, similar to miRNA, standard extraction methods and exosome sources are required, reducing the variability of study results.
4. Role of exosomes in differentiating PD from atypical parkinsonian syndrome
MSA is a primarily sporadic, adult-onset, fatal neurodegenerative disease, the etiology of which is still unknown [100]. Neuro-
pathological hallmark of MSA is the appearance of misfolded α-syn in oligodendrocytes [101]. There a

Chunk 26:
traction methods and exosome sources are required, reducing the variability of study results.
4. Role of exosomes in differentiating PD from atypical parkinsonian syndrome
MSA is a primarily sporadic, adult-onset, fatal neurodegenerative disease, the etiology of which is still unknown [100]. Neuro-
pathological hallmark of MSA is the appearance of misfolded α-syn in oligodendrocytes [101]. There are two types of MSA: MSA-P,
which is predominantly Parkinsonism, and MSA-C, which is predominantly cerebellar in character, and they are associated with
two major morphological variants of striatonigral degeneration (SND) and olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), respectively [102].
In the early stages of the disease, symptoms of PD and MSA may overlap [103]. In clinic, early identification of the both is a challenge
[104]. Recently, Dutta et al. investigated whether α-syn in neuron-derived and oligodendrocyte-derived exosomes isolated from the
serum or plasma could distinguish among healthy controls, PD patients, and MSA patients [44]. As a result, the order of increase of
7

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
α-syn in both the neuronal and oligodendroglial exosomes were control <PD <MSA, which is reversed from the findings of Jiang et al.
[46]. In addition, they found that the ratio between α-syn concentrations in oligodendroglial exosomes compared to neuronal exo-
somes was a particularly sensitive biomarker for differentiating PD from MSA.
PSP is one of the most common APS and is characterized by vertical gaze palsy, dysarthria, dysphagia and frontal lobe syndrome
[105]. The differential diagnosis between PD and PSP is often challenging, especially in the early stages of the disease. Recently, Ida
Manna et al. investigated whether miRNA in serum exosomes could be used as a biomarker to distinguish PD from PSP [106]. They
found that the best discriminated PSP from PD was a set of six miRNAs (miR-21–3p, miR-199a-5p, miR-425–5p, miR-483–5p,
miR-22–3p

Chunk 27:
 syndrome
[105]. The differential diagnosis between PD and PSP is often challenging, especially in the early stages of the disease. Recently, Ida
Manna et al. investigated whether miRNA in serum exosomes could be used as a biomarker to distinguish PD from PSP [106]. They
found that the best discriminated PSP from PD was a set of six miRNAs (miR-21–3p, miR-199a-5p, miR-425–5p, miR-483–5p,
miR-22–3p and miR-29a-3p) with an AUC =0.91 and a diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of 0.89 and 0.90, respectively. Thus, the
researchers suggested that exosomal miRNA combinations can provide good diagnostic discrimination and will be validated in larger
cohorts in the future and can be used to support the clinical differential diagnosis of PSP and PD.
The typical DLB patient presents with early dementia, usually with visual hallucinations. Extrapyramidal motor signs and symp-
toms characterized by PD usually appear simultaneously or quickly. Progressive cognitive decline starts early, usually after age 55
[107]. The cognitive fields affected in DLB and Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) largely overlap, with significant executive
dysfunction and visuospatial abnormalities, as well as variable impairment in memory capacity [108]. According to international
consensus, DLB is diagnosed when cognitive impairment precedes parkinsonian motor signs or begins within 1 year of its onset [109].
In contrast, in PDD, cognitive impairment develops in the context of diagnosed PD [110]. Despite the different chronology of motor
and cognitive deficits and some clinical differences, the two disorders show a large degree of convergence [111]. Accurate differen-
tiation between PD, DLB is challenging due to the overlap of clinical symptoms and neuropathological changes. Stuendl et al. found
that CSF exosomal α-syn has potential as a biomarker for differentiating PD from DLB [38]. CFS samples from DLB patients contained
fewer exosomes and lower levels of exosomal α-syn compared to PD patients an

Chunk 28:
 show a large degree of convergence [111]. Accurate differen-
tiation between PD, DLB is challenging due to the overlap of clinical symptoms and neuropathological changes. Stuendl et al. found
that CSF exosomal α-syn has potential as a biomarker for differentiating PD from DLB [38]. CFS samples from DLB patients contained
fewer exosomes and lower levels of exosomal α-syn compared to PD patients and controls. ROC curve analysis also showed high
sensitivity and specificity of exosomal α-syn for identifying DLB, PD and controls.
CBD is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by asymmetric akinetic-rigid syndrome, dysfunction, dys-
tonia, and postural abnormalities. The pathology is characterized by the accumulation of abnormal tau proteins in neurons and glial
cells. In the early stages of CBD, it is often diagnosed incorrectly as PD or other degenerative diseases [112]. In recent study, Meloni
et al. isolated neural-derived exosomes from serum of PD patients and patients with APS, including CBD and PSP patients, to verify
whether exosomal α-syn and Tau aggregates have a differential diagnostic effect [113]. As might be expected, exosomal oligomeric
α-syn is significantly elevated in PD compared to APS, whereas exosomal Tau aggregates are significantly augmented in APS compared
to PD. Combination of both biomarkers separated PD from APS (PD vs. PSP with AUC =0.880, PD vs. CBD with AUC =0.902). Of note,
there was a positive correlation between exosomal oligomeric α-syn and disease severity (disease duration, Modified H&Y, UPDRS
motor scores) in PD patients. Therefore, α-syn and tau aggregates in neural-derived exosomes could be promising biomarkers.
In 2020 Jiang et al. expanded the types of cases and explored the clinical application of serum neuronal exosomes as biomarkers for
PD, MSA, and other proteinopathies. They analyzed serum from 664 participants from three regions with RBD, PD, DLB, MSA, FTD,
PSP, CBD and healthy controls [46]. They found

Chunk 29:
. Therefore, α-syn and tau aggregates in neural-derived exosomes could be promising biomarkers.
In 2020 Jiang et al. expanded the types of cases and explored the clinical application of serum neuronal exosomes as biomarkers for
PD, MSA, and other proteinopathies. They analyzed serum from 664 participants from three regions with RBD, PD, DLB, MSA, FTD,
PSP, CBD and healthy controls [46]. They found that α-syn was increased in RBD, PD and DLB exosomes by ~ twofold compared with
controls, MSA or other proteinopathies. Besides α-syn, clusterin concentrations in serum neuronal exosomes were also significantly
different between disease groups. The combination of α-syn and clusterin allowed to distinguish PD from MSA (AUC =0.94) and other
proteinopathies (AUC =0.98).
In 2021, Jiang et al. validated their early findings with a number of additional samples and combined them with their previous data
in a joint analysis, bringing the total sample size to 735 individuals (PD (n =290), MSA (n =50), PSP (n =116), CBD (n =88), healthy
controls (n =191)) [114]. This is the largest study of exosomal α-syn in PD and related disorders. This study confirmed that α-syn levels
in L1CAM-immunocaptured exosomes above 14 pg/mL are a robust biomarker for differentiating PD from MSA (AUC, 0.90 vs 0.98) or
4-repeat tauopathies (AUC, 0.93 vs 0.94). And when combined with exosomal clusterin, it improves the discrimination between PD
and 4-repeat tauopathy. This remarkable finding suggests that future studies should include clusterin among the markers used to
distinguish APS.
This section describes the differentiating diagnostic role of exosomes between PD and various APS. Notably, most studies have
examined exosomes of neurological origin, while few comparative studies have been conducted on exosomes from different brain cell
types, for example, exosomes derived from neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. At the same time, we propose a larger idea of
whether exosomes of nigrostriatal dopamin

Chunk 30:
ifferentiating diagnostic role of exosomes between PD and various APS. Notably, most studies have
examined exosomes of neurological origin, while few comparative studies have been conducted on exosomes from different brain cell
types, for example, exosomes derived from neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. At the same time, we propose a larger idea of
whether exosomes of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuronal origin can be extracted for analysis in the future, which will make a greater
contribution to the diagnosis of PD. In addition, due to the different pathological proteins of APS, the diagnosis of PD and APS can be
greatly assisted by the method of combining multiple biomarkers.
5. Conclusion
Overall, the field of exosome research has evolved rapidly over the past decade. Since exosomes are carriers of intercellular
communication, they can influence gene expression and protein activity in recipient cells by carrying “cargo” such as proteins and
miRNAs. Therefore, it can lead to the propagation of misfolded proteins, such as α-syn. The use of targeted exosomes as diagnostic tools
for biomarker detection has received much attention. Many studies have shown the feasibility of utilizing exosomes, especially those
originating from the central nervous system, as diagnostic biomarkers for PD and APS. Isolation of exosomes derived from specific
brain cell types, such as astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, may provide a more specific and valuable source of diagnostic and pro-
gression biomarkers. However, the isolation of exosomes derived from specific brain cell types and the validation of the cell type of
origin are still to be strictly addressed.
8

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
Author contribution statement
All authors listed have significantly contributed to the development and the writing of this article.
Data availability statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Funding
This work was supported by Tianjin Key

Chunk 31:
lidation of the cell type of
origin are still to be strictly addressed.
8

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
Author contribution statement
All authors listed have significantly contributed to the development and the writing of this article.
Data availability statement
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Funding
This work was supported by Tianjin Key Medical Discipline (Specialty) Construction Project; Tianjin Health Commission under
grants TJWJ2022MS004; 2023001; Tianjin Municipal Science and Technology Commission 22YDTPJC00350.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful for the help of my supervisor, Xiaodong Zhu, who gave me some valuable advice. He also helped me to revise the
draft and correct the spelling and grammar. I also want to thank my teammates, for their friendly assistance and punctual information
that helped me through the whole process of the article writing.
References
[1] Collaborators, G.B.D.P.s.D., Global, regional, and national burden of Parkinson’s disease, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2016, Lancet Neurol. 17 (11) (2018) 939–953, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30295-3.
[2] Movement disorders: volume 35, Number S1, September 2020, Mov. Disord. 35 (S1) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28267.
[3] Z. Zheng, et al., Burden of Parkinson disease in China, 1990-2019: findings from the 2019 global burden of disease study, Neuroepidemiology 57 (1) (2023)
51–64, https://doi.org/10.1159/000527372.
[4] A. Ascherio, M.A. Schwarzschild, The epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease: risk factors and prevention, Lancet Neurol. 15 (12) (2016) 1257–1272, https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30230-7.
[5] C.Y. Kim, R.N. Alcalay, Genetic forms of Parkinson’s disease, Semin. 

Chunk 32:
: findings from the 2019 global burden of disease study, Neuroepidemiology 57 (1) (2023)
51–64, https://doi.org/10.1159/000527372.
[4] A. Ascherio, M.A. Schwarzschild, The epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease: risk factors and prevention, Lancet Neurol. 15 (12) (2016) 1257–1272, https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30230-7.
[5] C.Y. Kim, R.N. Alcalay, Genetic forms of Parkinson’s disease, Semin. Neurol. 37 (2) (2017) 135–146, https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0037-1601567.
[6] W. Dauer, S. Przedborski, Parkinson’s disease: mechanisms and models, Neuron 39 (6) (2003) 889–909, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00568-3.
[7] H. Braak, et al., Staging of the intracerebral inclusion body pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (preclinical and clinical stages), J. Neurol.
249 (Suppl 3) (2002) 1–5, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-002-1301-4. III.
[8] J. Jankovic, Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 79 (4) (2008) 368–376, https://doi.org/10.1136/
jnnp.2007.131045.
[9] J.W. Langston, The Parkinson’s complex: parkinsonism is just the tip of the iceberg, Ann. Neurol. 59 (4) (2006) 591–596, https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.20834.
[10] R.B. Postuma, et al., MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 30 (12) (2015) 1591–1601, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26424.
[11] J.W. Langston, Predicting Parkinson’s disease, Neurology 40 (10 Suppl 3) (1990) suppl 70-4; discussion 75-6.
[12] S.R. Suwijn, et al., The diagnostic accuracy of dopamine transporter SPECT imaging to detect nigrostriatal cell loss in patients with Parkinson’s disease or
clinically uncertain parkinsonism: a systematic review, EJNMMI Res. 5 (2015) 12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13550-015-0087-1.
[13] S.K. Meles, W.H. Oertel, K.L. Leenders, Circuit imaging biomarkers in preclinical and prodromal Parkinson’s disease, Mol. Med. 27 (1) (2021) 111, https://doi.
org/10.1186/s10020-021-00327-x.
[14] O.M. Alzghool, et al., Alpha-synuclein radiot

Chunk 33:
s with Parkinson’s disease or
clinically uncertain parkinsonism: a systematic review, EJNMMI Res. 5 (2015) 12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13550-015-0087-1.
[13] S.K. Meles, W.H. Oertel, K.L. Leenders, Circuit imaging biomarkers in preclinical and prodromal Parkinson’s disease, Mol. Med. 27 (1) (2021) 111, https://doi.
org/10.1186/s10020-021-00327-x.
[14] O.M. Alzghool, et al., Alpha-synuclein radiotracer development and in vivo imaging: recent advancements and new perspectives, Mov. Disord. 37 (5) (2022)
936–948, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28984.
[15] H. Braak, et al., Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease, Neurobiol. Aging 24 (2) (2003) 197–211, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-
4580(02)00065-9.
[16] S.A. Bellingham, et al., Exosomes: vehicles for the transfer of toxic proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases? Front. Physiol. 3 (2012) 124, https://
doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2012.00124.
[17] M. Guo, et al., Microglial exosomes facilitate alpha-synuclein transmission in Parkinson’s disease, Brain 143 (5) (2020) 1476–1497, https://doi.org/10.1093/
brain/awaa090.
[18] T. Yang, et al., Exosome delivered anticancer drugs across the blood-brain barrier for brain cancer therapy in Danio rerio, Pharm. Res. (N. Y.) 32 (6) (2015)
2003–2014, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-014-1593-y.
[19] E.J. Goetzl, et al., Altered lysosomal proteins in neural-derived plasma exosomes in preclinical Alzheimer disease, Neurology 85 (1) (2015) 40–47, https://doi.
org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001702.
[20] C. Thery, L. Zitvogel, S. Amigorena, Exosomes: composition, biogenesis and function, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2 (8) (2002) 569–579, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nri855.
[21] R. Kalluri, V.S. LeBleu, The biology, function, and biomedical applications of exosomes, Science 367 (6478) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau6977.
[22] G. Lachenal, et al., Release of exosomes from differentiated neurons and its regulation by synaptic glutamatergic activity, Mol. Cell. Neurosci.

Chunk 34:
 and function, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2 (8) (2002) 569–579, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nri855.
[21] R. Kalluri, V.S. LeBleu, The biology, function, and biomedical applications of exosomes, Science 367 (6478) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau6977.
[22] G. Lachenal, et al., Release of exosomes from differentiated neurons and its regulation by synaptic glutamatergic activity, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 46 (2) (2011)
409–418, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2010.11.004.
[23] R. Wubbolts, et al., Proteomic and biochemical analyses of human B cell-derived exosomes. Potential implications for their function and multivesicular body
formation, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (13) (2003) 10963–10972, https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M207550200.
[24] G. van Meer, D.R. Voelker, G.W. Feigenson, Membrane lipids: where they are and how they behave, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9 (2) (2008) 112–124, https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrm2330.
[25] Y. Zhang, et al., Exosome: a review of its classification, isolation techniques, storage, diagnostic and targeted therapy applications, Int J Nanomedicine 15
(2020) 6917–6934, https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S264498.
[26] D. Skokos, et al., Mast cell-dependent B and T lymphocyte activation is mediated by the secretion of immunologically active exosomes, J. Immunol. 166 (2)
(2001) 868–876, https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.166.2.868.
9

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
[27] G. Chen, et al., Exosomal PD-L1 contributes to immunosuppression and is associated with anti-PD-1 response, Nature 560 (7718) (2018) 382–386, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-018-0392-8.
[28] H. Valadi, et al., Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells, Nat. Cell Biol. 9 (6) (2007)
654–659, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1596.
[29] A. Sharma, A. Johnson, Exosome DNA: critical regulator of tumor immunity and a diagnostic biomarker, J. Cell. Physiol. 235 (3) (2020) 1921–1932, https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcp.29153.
[30] V. Budnik, C.

Chunk 35:
 H. Valadi, et al., Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells, Nat. Cell Biol. 9 (6) (2007)
654–659, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1596.
[29] A. Sharma, A. Johnson, Exosome DNA: critical regulator of tumor immunity and a diagnostic biomarker, J. Cell. Physiol. 235 (3) (2020) 1921–1932, https://
doi.org/10.1002/jcp.29153.
[30] V. Budnik, C. Ruiz-Canada, F. Wendler, Extracellular vesicles round off communication in the nervous system, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17 (3) (2016) 160–172,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2015.29.
[31] P. Desplats, et al., Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron transmission of alpha-synuclein, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106
(31) (2009) 13010–13015, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903691106.
[32] L. Crews, et al., Selective molecular alterations in the autophagy pathway in patients with Lewy body disease and in models of alpha-synucleinopathy, PLoS
One 5 (2) (2010) e9313, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009313.
[33] G. Minakaki, et al., Autophagy inhibition promotes SNCA/alpha-synuclein release and transfer via extracellular vesicles with a hybrid autophagosome-
exosome-like phenotype, Autophagy 14 (1) (2018) 98–119, https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2017.1395992.
[34] M. Delenclos, et al., Investigation of endocytic pathways for the internalization of exosome-associated oligomeric alpha-synuclein, Front. Neurosci. 11 (2017)
172, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00172.
[35] Y. Huang, et al., Parkinson’s disease derived exosomes aggravate neuropathology in SNCA*A53T mice, Ann. Neurol. 92 (2) (2022) 230–245, https://doi.org/
10.1002/ana.26421.
[36] Y. Jin, et al., Exosomes from inflamed macrophages promote the progression of Parkinson’s disease by inducing neuroinflammation, Mol. Neurobiol. 60 (4)
(2023) 1914–1928, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-03179-6.
[37] C. Han, et al., Exosomes from patients with Parkinson’s disease are pathological in mice, J. Mol. 

Chunk 36:
mice, Ann. Neurol. 92 (2) (2022) 230–245, https://doi.org/
10.1002/ana.26421.
[36] Y. Jin, et al., Exosomes from inflamed macrophages promote the progression of Parkinson’s disease by inducing neuroinflammation, Mol. Neurobiol. 60 (4)
(2023) 1914–1928, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-03179-6.
[37] C. Han, et al., Exosomes from patients with Parkinson’s disease are pathological in mice, J. Mol. Med. (Berl.) 97 (9) (2019) 1329–1344, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00109-019-01810-z.
[38] A. Stuendl, et al., Induction of alpha-synuclein aggregate formation by CSF exosomes from patients with Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies,
Brain 139 (Pt 2) (2016) 481–494, https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv346.
[39] M. Shi, et al., Plasma exosomal α-synuclein is likely CNS-derived and increased in Parkinson’s disease, Acta Neuropathol. 128 (5) (2014) 639–650, https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00401-014-1314-y.
[40] H. Zheng, et al., Investigation of alpha-synuclein species in plasma exosomes and the oligomeric and phosphorylated alpha-synuclein as potential peripheral
biomarker of Parkinson’s disease, Neuroscience 469 (2021) 79–90, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.06.033.
[41] M. Niu, et al., A longitudinal study on alpha-synuclein in plasma neuronal exosomes as a biomarker for Parkinson’s disease development and progression, Eur.
J. Neurol. 27 (6) (2020) 967–974, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.14208.
[42] Y.Q. Yan, et al., Different patterns of exosomal alpha-synuclein between Parkinson’s disease and probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, Eur. J.
Neurol. 29 (12) (2022) 3590–3599, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.15537.
[43] J. Zou, et al., Long noncoding RNA POU3F3 and alpha-synuclein in plasma L1CAM exosomes combined with beta-glucocerebrosidase activity: potential
predictors of Parkinson’s disease, Neurotherapeutics 17 (3) (2020) 1104–1119, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-020-00842-5.
[44] S. Dutta, et al., α-Synuclein in blood exosomes immunoprecipitated using 

Chunk 37:
22) 3590–3599, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.15537.
[43] J. Zou, et al., Long noncoding RNA POU3F3 and alpha-synuclein in plasma L1CAM exosomes combined with beta-glucocerebrosidase activity: potential
predictors of Parkinson’s disease, Neurotherapeutics 17 (3) (2020) 1104–1119, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-020-00842-5.
[44] S. Dutta, et al., α-Synuclein in blood exosomes immunoprecipitated using neuronal and oligodendroglial markers distinguishes Parkinson’s disease from
multiple system atrophy, Acta Neuropathol. 142 (3) (2021) 495–511, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-021-02324-0.
[45] X. Si, et al., Central nervous system-derived exosomal alpha-synuclein in serum may Be a biomarker in Parkinson’s disease, Neuroscience 413 (2019) 308–316,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2019.05.015.
[46] C. Jiang, et al., Serum neuronal exosomes predict and differentiate Parkinson’s disease from atypical parkinsonism, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91 (7)
(2020) 720–729, https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2019-322588.
[47] K. Rani, et al., Neuronal exosomes in saliva of Parkinson’s disease patients: a pilot study, Parkinsonism Relat. Disorders 67 (2019) 21–23, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.09.008.
[48] Z.H. Zhao, et al., Increased DJ-1 and alpha-synuclein in plasma neural-derived exosomes as potential markers for Parkinson’s disease, Front. Aging Neurosci.
10 (2018) 438, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00438.
[49] D.H. Ho, et al., Increased DJ-1 in urine exosome of Korean males with Parkinson’s disease, BioMed Res. Int. 2014 (2014), 704678, https://doi.org/10.1155/
2014/704678.
[50] S. Wang, et al., Elevated LRRK2 autophosphorylation in brain-derived and peripheral exosomes in LRRK2 mutation carriers, Acta Neuropathol Commun 5 (1)
(2017) 86, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-017-0492-y.
[51] K.B. Fraser, et al., Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in urinary exosomes is elevated in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 31 (10) (2016) 1543–1550, https://doi.
org/10.1002/mds.2668

Chunk 38:
04678.
[50] S. Wang, et al., Elevated LRRK2 autophosphorylation in brain-derived and peripheral exosomes in LRRK2 mutation carriers, Acta Neuropathol Commun 5 (1)
(2017) 86, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-017-0492-y.
[51] K.B. Fraser, et al., Ser(P)-1292 LRRK2 in urinary exosomes is elevated in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 31 (10) (2016) 1543–1550, https://doi.
org/10.1002/mds.26686.
[52] K.B. Fraser, et al., Urinary LRRK2 phosphorylation predicts parkinsonian phenotypes in G2019S LRRK2 carriers, Neurology 86 (11) (2016) 994–999, https://
doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002436.
[53] M. Shi, et al., CNS tau efflux via exosomes is likely increased in Parkinson’s disease but not in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Dement 12 (11) (2016)
1125–1131, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2016.04.003.
[54] K.H. Shim, et al., Decreased exosomal acetylcholinesterase activity in the plasma of patients with Parkinson’s disease, Front. Aging Neurosci. 13 (2021),
665400, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.665400.
[55] Y. Gui, et al., Altered microRNA profiles in cerebrospinal fluid exosome in Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease, Oncotarget 6 (35) (2015) 37043–37053,
https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.6158.
[56] C. Nie, et al., Differential expression of plasma exo-miRNA in neurodegenerative diseases by next-generation sequencing, Front. Neurosci. 14 (2020) 438,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2020.00438.
[57] Y.F. Yao, et al., Circulating exosomal miRNAs as diagnostic biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease, Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 22 (16) (2018) 5278–5283,
https://doi.org/10.26355/eurrev_201808_15727.
[58] X.Y. Cao, et al., MicroRNA biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease in serum exosome-like microvesicles, Neurosci. Lett. 644 (2017) 94–99, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neulet.2017.02.045.
[59] Q. Wang, et al., Integrated analysis of exosomal lncRNA and mRNA expression profiles reveals the involvement of lnc-MKRN2-42:1 in the pathogenesis of
Parkinson’s disease, CNS Neurosci. 

Chunk 39:
6355/eurrev_201808_15727.
[58] X.Y. Cao, et al., MicroRNA biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease in serum exosome-like microvesicles, Neurosci. Lett. 644 (2017) 94–99, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neulet.2017.02.045.
[59] Q. Wang, et al., Integrated analysis of exosomal lncRNA and mRNA expression profiles reveals the involvement of lnc-MKRN2-42:1 in the pathogenesis of
Parkinson’s disease, CNS Neurosci. Ther. 26 (5) (2020) 527–537, https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.13277.
[60] K. Sano, et al., Prion-like seeding of misfolded alpha-synuclein in the brains of dementia with Lewy body patients in RT-QUIC, Mol. Neurobiol. 55 (5) (2018)
3916–3930, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-017-0624-1.
[61] K.M. Danzer, et al., Exosomal cell-to-cell transmission of alpha synuclein oligomers, Mol. Neurodegener. 7 (2012) 42, https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1326-7-
42.
[62] S. Kenwrick, A. Watkins, E. De Angelis, Neural cell recognition molecule L1: relating biological complexity to human disease mutations, Hum. Mol. Genet. 9
(6) (2000) 879–886, https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.6.879.
[63] R.B. Postuma, et al., Parkinson risk in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: preparing for neuroprotective trials, Neurology 84 (11) (2015) 1104–1113,
https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001364.
[64] C.M. Clements, et al., DJ-1, a cancer- and Parkinson’s disease-associated protein, stabilizes the antioxidant transcriptional master regulator Nrf 2, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (41) (2006) 15091–15096, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0607260103.
[65] J. Choi, et al., Oxidative damage of DJ-1 is linked to sporadic Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (16) (2006) 10816–10824, https://doi.org/
10.1074/jbc.M509079200.
10

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
[66] M.C.T. Dos Santos, et al., Evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid proteins as potential biomarkers for early stage Parkinson’s disease diagnosis, PLoS One 13 (11)
(2018), e0206536, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0206536.
[

Chunk 40:
and Alzheimer diseases, J. Biol. Chem. 281 (16) (2006) 10816–10824, https://doi.org/
10.1074/jbc.M509079200.
10

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
[66] M.C.T. Dos Santos, et al., Evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid proteins as potential biomarkers for early stage Parkinson’s disease diagnosis, PLoS One 13 (11)
(2018), e0206536, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0206536.
[67] M. Waragai, et al., Plasma levels of DJ-1 as a possible marker for progression of sporadic Parkinson’s disease, Neurosci. Lett. 425 (1) (2007) 18–22, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neulet.2007.08.010.
[68] C. An, et al., Expression of the DJ-1 protein in the serum of Chinese patients with Parkinson’s disease, Neurosci. Lett. 665 (2018) 236–239, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neulet.2017.12.023.
[69] J. Jang, et al., Oxidized DJ-1 Levels in Urine Samples as a Putative Biomarker for Parkinson’s Disease, vol. 2018, Parkinsons Dis, 2018, 1241757, https://doi.
org/10.1155/2018/1241757.
[70] P.A. Gonzales, et al., Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary exosomes, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 20 (2) (2009) 363–379, https://doi.org/
10.1681/ASN.2008040406.
[71] T. Pisitkun, R.F. Shen, M.A. Knepper, Identification and proteomic profiling of exosomes in human urine, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101 (36) (2004)
13368–13373, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0403453101.
[72] D. Berg, et al., Type and frequency of mutations in the LRRK2 gene in familial and sporadic Parkinson’s disease*, Brain 128 (Pt 12) (2005) 3000–3011, https://
doi.org/10.1093/brain/awh666.
[73] C. Paisan-Ruiz, et al., Cloning of the gene containing mutations that cause PARK8-linked Parkinson’s disease, Neuron 44 (4) (2004) 595–600, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2004.10.023.
[74] K.E. Rosenbusch, A. Kortholt, Activation mechanism of LRRK2 and its cellular functions in Parkinson’s disease, Parkinsons Dis 2016 (2016), 7351985, https://
doi.org/10.1155/2016/7351985.
[75] K.B. Fraser, et al., LRRK2 secretion in exos

Chunk 41:
ing of the gene containing mutations that cause PARK8-linked Parkinson’s disease, Neuron 44 (4) (2004) 595–600, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2004.10.023.
[74] K.E. Rosenbusch, A. Kortholt, Activation mechanism of LRRK2 and its cellular functions in Parkinson’s disease, Parkinsons Dis 2016 (2016), 7351985, https://
doi.org/10.1155/2016/7351985.
[75] K.B. Fraser, et al., LRRK2 secretion in exosomes is regulated by 14-3-3, Hum. Mol. Genet. 22 (24) (2013) 4988–5000, https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt346.
[76] R. Di Maio, et al., LRRK2 activation in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, Sci. Transl. Med. 10 (451) (2018), https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aar5429.
[77] M. Goedert, M.G. Spillantini, A century of Alzheimer’s disease, Science 314 (5800) (2006) 777–781, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1132814.
[78] M.G. Spillantini, M. Goedert, Tau pathology and neurodegeneration, Lancet Neurol. 12 (6) (2013) 609–622, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70090-
5.
[79] J. Wills, et al., Elevated tauopathy and alpha-synuclein pathology in postmortem Parkinson’s disease brains with and without dementia, Exp. Neurol. 225 (1)
(2010) 210–218, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.06.017.
[80] T.L. Edwards, et al., Genome-wide association study confirms SNPs in SNCA and the MAPT region as common risk factors for Parkinson disease, Ann. Hum.
Genet. 74 (2) (2010) 97–109, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-1809.2009.00560.x.
[81] J. Simon-Sanchez, et al., Genome-wide association study reveals genetic risk underlying Parkinson’s disease, Nat. Genet. 41 (12) (2009) 1308–1312, https://
doi.org/10.1038/ng.487.
[82] S.C. Vermilyea, et al., Loss of tau expression attenuates neurodegeneration associated with alpha-synucleinopathy, Transl. Neurodegener. 11 (1) (2022) 34,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-022-00309-x.
[83] M.L. Muller, N.I. Bohnen, Cholinergic dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease, Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 13 (9) (2013) 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-
013-0377-9.
[84] N.I. B

Chunk 42:
.1038/ng.487.
[82] S.C. Vermilyea, et al., Loss of tau expression attenuates neurodegeneration associated with alpha-synucleinopathy, Transl. Neurodegener. 11 (1) (2022) 34,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-022-00309-x.
[83] M.L. Muller, N.I. Bohnen, Cholinergic dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease, Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 13 (9) (2013) 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-
013-0377-9.
[84] N.I. Bohnen, et al., Cholinergic system changes in Parkinson’s disease: emerging therapeutic approaches, Lancet Neurol. 21 (4) (2022) 381–392, https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00377-X.
[85] N.I. Bohnen, et al., Cortical cholinergic function is more severely affected in parkinsonian dementia than in Alzheimer disease: an in vivo positron emission
tomographic study, Arch. Neurol. 60 (12) (2003) 1745–1748, https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.60.12.1745.
[86] T. Gjerloff, et al., Imaging acetylcholinesterase density in peripheral organs in Parkinson’s disease with 11C-donepezil PET, Brain 138 (Pt 3) (2015) 653–663,
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu369.
[87] R. Jiang, et al., Differential proteomic analysis of serum exosomes reveals alterations in progression of Parkinson disease, Medicine (Baltim.) 98 (41) (2019),
e17478, https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000017478.
[88] Y. Kitamura, et al., Proteomic profiling of exosomal proteins for blood-based biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease, Neuroscience 392 (2018) 121–128, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.09.017.
[89] F. Anastasi, et al., Proteomics profiling of neuron-derived small extracellular vesicles from human plasma: enabling single-subject analysis, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22
(6) (2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22062951.
[90] Y.O. Jang, et al., Magnetic transferrin nanoparticles (MTNs) assay as a novel isolation approach for exosomal biomarkers in neurological diseases, Biomater.
Res. 27 (1) (2023) 12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40824-023-00353-2.
[91] S. Dutta, et al., Biomarkers for parkinsonian disorders in CNS-originati

Chunk 43:
ngle-subject analysis, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22
(6) (2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22062951.
[90] Y.O. Jang, et al., Magnetic transferrin nanoparticles (MTNs) assay as a novel isolation approach for exosomal biomarkers in neurological diseases, Biomater.
Res. 27 (1) (2023) 12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40824-023-00353-2.
[91] S. Dutta, et al., Biomarkers for parkinsonian disorders in CNS-originating EVs: promise and challenges, Acta Neuropathol. 145 (5) (2023) 515–540, https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00401-023-02557-1.
[92] H. Wang, MicroRNAs, Parkinson’s disease, and diabetes mellitus, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (6) (2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22062953.
[93] A. Turchinovich, et al., Characterization of extracellular circulating microRNA, Nucleic Acids Res. 39 (16) (2011) 7223–7233, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkr254.
[94] R. Margis, R. Margis, C.R. Rieder, Identification of blood microRNAs associated to Parkinsonis disease, J. Biotechnol. 152 (3) (2011) 96–101, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.01.023.
[95] T. Botta-Orfila, et al., Identification of blood serum micro-RNAs associated with idiopathic and LRRK2 Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurosci. Res. 92 (8) (2014)
1071–1077, https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.23377.
[96] A. Vallelunga, et al., Identification of circulating microRNAs for the differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease and Multiple System Atrophy, Front. Cell.
Neurosci. 8 (2014) 156, https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2014.00156.
[97] X. Qian, et al., Revealing lncRNA structures and interactions by sequencing-based approaches, Trends Biochem. Sci. 44 (1) (2019) 33–52, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tibs.2018.09.012.
[98] P. Wu, et al., Roles of long noncoding RNAs in brain development, functional diversification and neurodegenerative diseases, Brain Res. Bull. 97 (2013) 69–80,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2013.06.001.
[99] D.E.C. Boer, et al., Glucocerebrosidase: functions in and beyond the lysosome, J. Clin. Med. 9 (3) (2020), https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm

Chunk 44:
https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tibs.2018.09.012.
[98] P. Wu, et al., Roles of long noncoding RNAs in brain development, functional diversification and neurodegenerative diseases, Brain Res. Bull. 97 (2013) 69–80,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2013.06.001.
[99] D.E.C. Boer, et al., Glucocerebrosidase: functions in and beyond the lysosome, J. Clin. Med. 9 (3) (2020), https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9030736.
[100] A. Fanciulli, G.K. Wenning, Multiple-system atrophy, N. Engl. J. Med. 372 (3) (2015) 249–263, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1311488.
[101] S. Gilman, et al., Second consensus statement on the diagnosis of multiple system atrophy, Neurology 71 (9) (2008) 670–676, https://doi.org/10.1212/01.
wnl.0000324625.00404.15.
[102] A. Fanciulli, et al., Multiple system atrophy, Int. Rev. Neurobiol. 149 (2019) 137–192, https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.irn.2019.10.004.
[103] J.E. Galvin, V.M. Lee, J.Q. Trojanowski, Synucleinopathies: clinical and pathological implications, Arch. Neurol. 58 (2) (2001) 186–190, https://doi.org/
10.1001/archneur.58.2.186.
[104] G.K. Wenning, et al., What clinical features are most useful to distinguish definite multiple system atrophy from Parkinson’s disease? J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 68 (4) (2000) 434–440, https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.68.4.434.
[105] G.U. Hoglinger, et al., Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: the movement disorder society criteria, Mov. Disord. 32 (6) (2017) 853–864,
https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26987.
[106] I. Manna, et al., Exosomal miRNA as peripheral biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy: a pilot study, Parkinsonism Relat.
Disorders 93 (2021) 77–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2021.11.020.
[107] I.G. McKeith, et al., Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB Consortium, Neurology 65 (12) (2005) 1863–1872,
https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000187889.17253.b1.
[108] C.F. Lippa, et al., DLB and PDD boundary issues: diagnosis, treat

Chunk 45:
ar palsy: a pilot study, Parkinsonism Relat.
Disorders 93 (2021) 77–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2021.11.020.
[107] I.G. McKeith, et al., Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB Consortium, Neurology 65 (12) (2005) 1863–1872,
https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000187889.17253.b1.
[108] C.F. Lippa, et al., DLB and PDD boundary issues: diagnosis, treatment, molecular pathology, and biomarkers, Neurology 68 (11) (2007) 812–819, https://doi.
org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000256715.13907.d3.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

Q. Shi et al. H e l i y o n9(2023)e20595
[109] L. Bonanni, A. Thomas, M. Onofrj, Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB Consortium, Neurology 66 (9) (2006)
1455, https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000224698.67660.45. ; author reply 1455.
[110] M. Emre, et al., Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 22 (12) (2007) 1689–1707, https://doi.org/
10.1002/mds.21507. ; quiz 1837.
[111] Z. Walker, et al., Lewy body dementias, Lancet 386 (10004) (2015) 1683–1697, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00462-6.
[112] D.M.A. Swallow, C.E. Counsell, The evolution of diagnosis from symptom onset to death in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration
(CBD) compared to Parkinson’s disease (PD), J. Neurol. (2023), https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-023-11629-x.
[113] M. Meloni, et al., Oligomeric alpha-synuclein and tau aggregates in NDEVs differentiate Parkinson’s disease from atypical parkinsonisms, Neurobiol. Dis. 176
(2023), 105947, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105947.
[114] C. Jiang, et al., Validation of alpha-synuclein in l1cam-immunocaptured exosomes as a biomarker for the stratification of parkinsonian syndromes, Mov.
Disord. 36 (11) (2021) 2663–2669, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28591.
12

---PAGE BREAK---



Chunk 46:
://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105947.
[114] C. Jiang, et al., Validation of alpha-synuclein in l1cam-immunocaptured exosomes as a biomarker for the stratification of parkinsonian syndromes, Mov.
Disord. 36 (11) (2021) 2663–2669, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28591.
12

---PAGE BREAK---



