Chunk 1:
Cancers 2014, 6, 333-365; doi:10.3390/cancers6010333
OPEN ACCESS
cancers
ISSN 2072-6694
www.mdpi.com/journal/cancers
Review
HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 in Human Cancers: Potent
Oncogenic Role of Some of Their Client Proteins
André-Patrick Arrigo * and Benjamin Gibert
Apoptosis, Cancer and Development Laboratory, Lyon Cancer Research Center, INSERM U1052-CNRS
UMR5286, Claude Bernard University Lyon 1, Lyon 69008, France;
E-Mail: benjamin.gibert@lyon.unicancer.fr
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mails: parrigo@me.com or
arrigo@univ-lyon1.fr; Tel.: +33-0-478-785-971; Fax: +33-0-478-782-887.
Received: 11 November 2013; in revised form: 3 January 2014 / Accepted: 17 January 2014 /
Published: 7 February 2014
Abstract: Human small heat shock proteins are molecular chaperones that regulate
fundamental cellular processes in normal unstressed cells as well as in many cancer cells
where they are over-expressed. These proteins are characterized by cell physiology dependent
changes in their oligomerization and phosphorylation status. These structural changes
allow them to interact with many different client proteins that subsequently display modified
activity and/or half-life. Nowdays, the protein interactomes of small Hsps are under intense
investigations and will represent, when completed, key parameters to elaborate therapeutic
strategies aimed at modulating the functions of these chaperones. Here, we have analyzed
the potential pro-cancerous roles of several client proteins that have been described so far
to interact with HspB1 (Hsp27) and its close members HspB5 (αB-crystallin) and
HspB4 (αA-crystallin).
Keywords: human small Hsps; HspB1; HspB5; HspB4; Hsp27; alphaA-crystallin;
alphaB-crystallin; clients; cancer
1. Introduction
The literature is filled with reports describing the overexpression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) in
many types of cancer cells [1,2]. The phenomenon is probably linked to the drastic changes in protein
homeostasis resulting of the a

Chunk 2:
B-crystallin) and
HspB4 (αA-crystallin).
Keywords: human small Hsps; HspB1; HspB5; HspB4; Hsp27; alphaA-crystallin;
alphaB-crystallin; clients; cancer
1. Introduction
The literature is filled with reports describing the overexpression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) in
many types of cancer cells [1,2]. The phenomenon is probably linked to the drastic changes in protein
homeostasis resulting of the accumulation of mutated proteins in cancer cells [2–4]. Hsps have been

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 334
known for a long time as being able to prevent protein aggregation by binding polypeptide clients
destabilized during cellular stress, such as heat shock. Among Hsps, the ATP-independent molecular
chaperones HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 belong to the group of small Hsps characterized by a common
alpha-crystallin domain in their C-terminal part. Recently, small Hsps have been described to have an
incredible number of crucial roles in normal unstressed cells as well as in pathological cells where they
are usually expressed to high levels. These proteins are now considered as important therapeutic
targets, particularly in cancer pathologies [5,6]. Indeed, they display anti-apoptotic and tumorogenic
properties and trigger host anti-cancer response inhibition, such as senescence [7–13]. This results in
aggressive cancer cell growth [14–16], metastasis formation and dissemination [12,17–19] and poor
prognosis [2,20,21]. We have proposed that the large panel of cellular functions of small Hsps resulted
of their interaction with numerous client proteins whose activity and/or half-life was modified by these
chaperones [22–25]. Small Hsps protein interactomes appear therefore as fundamental parameters
to consider when studying the complex activities of these proteins. Here, we have reviewed the
pro-oncogenic client proteins interacting with HspB1, HspB5 or HspB4 that can play crucial roles in
human cancer pathologies.
2. Small Hsps in Human Cancer Pathologies
2.1. HspB1
Consequently

Chunk 3:
 modified by these
chaperones [22–25]. Small Hsps protein interactomes appear therefore as fundamental parameters
to consider when studying the complex activities of these proteins. Here, we have reviewed the
pro-oncogenic client proteins interacting with HspB1, HspB5 or HspB4 that can play crucial roles in
human cancer pathologies.
2. Small Hsps in Human Cancer Pathologies
2.1. HspB1
Consequently of the deleterous resistance and enhanced aggressivity brought to cancer cells by
HspB1, a high level of expression of this molecular chaperone usually results in poor clinical outcome
in the case of gastric, uterine, breast, prostate, ovarian, kidney and head/neck cancers as well as in tumors
from the urinary and nervous systems [2,20,21,26,27]. HspB1 is also deeply involved in the invasion
of tumor cells into surrounding tissues and formation of metastatic colonies [12,17–19,28,29]. Moreover,
high levels of HspB1 expression affect tumor susceptibility to adjuvant cancer treatments, including
chemotherapy, hyperthermia and radiation therapies [19]. Many client proteins are targeted by HspB1
to promote resistance to cell death and malignant phenotype [23–25]. Of particular interest, elevated
levels of HspB1 have also been detected in several cancer stem cells, such as those from lung and
breast cancers [30,31]. In these cells, HspB1 participates in their maintenance since its elimination
suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signatures linked to snail, vimentin, E-cadherin
and NF-κB [31] and induces long-term dormancy [32]. Snail is a well-defined client protein of HspB1
protected against a rapid degradation consequently of its interaction with this chaperone [33].
A relationship between HspB1 expression and the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has also been detected
supporting the hypothesis that this protein could act as a sensor of genetic imbalances
(haploinsufficiency) [34]. Indeed, it was observed that in oligodendroglial tumors HspB1 is a marker
of LOH of 1

Chunk 4:
pB1
protected against a rapid degradation consequently of its interaction with this chaperone [33].
A relationship between HspB1 expression and the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has also been detected
supporting the hypothesis that this protein could act as a sensor of genetic imbalances
(haploinsufficiency) [34]. Indeed, it was observed that in oligodendroglial tumors HspB1 is a marker
of LOH of 1p, information that could help to predict the disease prognosis. Another worth noting point
relates to HspB1 ability to enhance cancer cells resistance to a large panel of anti-cancer drugs [35–43].
For example, in MCF-7 breast cancer cells exposed to doxorubicin, survival cells are those
that overexpress HspB1 consequently of the increased activity of the POU4F2/Brn-3b transcription
factor [44]. This factor, which is elevated in more than 60% of breast cancers, modifies growth and
behavior of cancer cells by regulating the expression of several target genes [45]. Hence, HspB1

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 335
inhibition of drug-induced apoptosis by further enhancing HspB1 expression also increases the cellular
resistance to many anti-cancer drugs [46]. Contradictory findings have also been reported. For
example, in pancreatic cancer cells, HspB1 has been linked with increased sensitivity [47] as well as
with increased resistance [48] to gemcitabine. These opposite observations were reconciled by analyzing
an essential parameter of HspB1, that is its phosphorylation status [49]. Crucial effect of phosphorylation
has also been observed in Her-2/neu positive breast cancers, where serine 78 phosphorylated HspB1
correlates with Her-2/neu status and lymph node positivity [50]. In that respect, we have recently
described the major roles played by the dynamic phosphorylation of HspB1 in the regulation of the
anti-apoptotic strategies developped by this protein [51]. While RNAi strategies aimed at therapeutically
decrease HspB1 level as well as the search for inhibiting drugs 

Chunk 5:
e serine 78 phosphorylated HspB1
correlates with Her-2/neu status and lymph node positivity [50]. In that respect, we have recently
described the major roles played by the dynamic phosphorylation of HspB1 in the regulation of the
anti-apoptotic strategies developped by this protein [51]. While RNAi strategies aimed at therapeutically
decrease HspB1 level as well as the search for inhibiting drugs are nowdays deeply active, the use of
HspB1 in the clinic is still mainly as a prognostic indicator of specific cancer types [52].
2.2. HspB5 and HspB4
The major lens structure proteins HspB5 and HspB4 play essential roles in maintaining normal
cellular structure and physiology of both ocular and some non-ocular tissues. Mutations in these
polypeptides are responsible of various human diseases such as cataract, neural disorders, and
cardiovascular diseases. Of great interest was the recent discovery that abnormal over-expression of
these molecular chaperones often occurs in tumors [41,53,54]. The first report describing the
association of HspB5 and cancer was by studying breast carcinoma progression [55]. It was originaly
observed that HspB5 expression was closely associated with advanced tumor grade progression, lymph
vesicular invasion and mortality [53,56]. The phenomenon was particularly intense in ―triple-negative‖
breast tumors [55–57], consequently HspB5 is now considered as a biomarker in the diagnosis of
breast cancers, especially in those with advanced grade [57,58]. Concerning brain cancer, elevated levels
of HspB5 were clearly demonstrated to occur in the more aggressive stages of gliomas [59,60]. Similarly,
high levels of HspB5 are associated with low survival rate in hepatocellular carcinoma [61], lung
adenocarcinoma [62] and prostatic carcinoma [63]. However, exceptions exist since tumorogenesis can
occur in absence of HspB5 upregulation [64]. For example, the role of this protein in kidney
tumorogenesis is not clear since an increased level of expression of 

Chunk 6:
e stages of gliomas [59,60]. Similarly,
high levels of HspB5 are associated with low survival rate in hepatocellular carcinoma [61], lung
adenocarcinoma [62] and prostatic carcinoma [63]. However, exceptions exist since tumorogenesis can
occur in absence of HspB5 upregulation [64]. For example, the role of this protein in kidney
tumorogenesis is not clear since an increased level of expression of HspB5 generally occurs in low
grade tumors [65], a phenomenon which is in deep contrast to that observed in most breast and brain
tumors. HspB5 was also reported to be downregulated in anaplastic thyroid carcinomas [66], nasopharyngeal
carcinomas [67], cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck with clinical perineural
invasion [68], oral cancer [69,70] as well as human ovarian cancer [71] and testicular tumors [63].
How HspB5 expression can be either up or down regulated in some cancers? At least in breast cancers,
HspB5 up regulation may be linked to transcriptional activation. Indeed, HspB5 gene promoter
contains an Ets1 binding site that can be activated by the oncogenic transcription factor Ets1 [72]. This
Ets1-mediated event appears linked to poor survival.
Compared with HspB1, the functions of HspB5 and HspB4 in tumorogenesis are less known. As
mentioned above, HspB5 can promote tumorogenesis while the effects mediated by HspB4 are still
equivocal, at least in the few studies that have already been performed [26,73]. Interesting observations
have nevertheless been made which showed the dual effect of HspB4 that is either up- or down-regulated
depending of the tumor type. For example, elevated levels of HspB4 together with HspB5 are observed

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 336
in many of the lens tumor cells, while γ-crystallin is selectively reduced [74]. Similarly, HspB4 is also
detected in retinoblastoma [41] and in eyelids with sebaceous carcinoma [75]. In these tumors, HspB4
is supposed to prevent apoptosis of neoplastic cells and thus promotes tum

Chunk 7:
or type. For example, elevated levels of HspB4 together with HspB5 are observed

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 336
in many of the lens tumor cells, while γ-crystallin is selectively reduced [74]. Similarly, HspB4 is also
detected in retinoblastoma [41] and in eyelids with sebaceous carcinoma [75]. In these tumors, HspB4
is supposed to prevent apoptosis of neoplastic cells and thus promotes tumorogenesis. In contrast,
HspB4, which is expressed at moderate level in normal pancreas, is significantly downregulated in
different types of pancreatic carcinoma cells where genetically forced expression of this protein revealed
that it can act as a negative regulator that blocks cell transformation and retards cell migration [73].
The effect appears to occur through a modulation of ERK MAP kinase activity [54]. Hence, HspB4
and HspB5 appear to function differentially during tumorogenesis. In contrast to HspB1, therapeutic
targetings of HspB5 or HspB4 are still in the stage of experimental exploration [5].
3. HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 Clients and Their Potential Role in Cancer Pathologies
The literature is filled with reports describing the incredible number of roles played by small Hsps,
particularly HspB1 and HspB5 in cancer cells. How can these proteins have such a vast spectrum of
activities? We recently proposed, in view of our recent results, that their apparent pleiotropic activities
probably result of their ability to bind, chaperone and modulate the activity or half-life of many protein
targets involved in crucial cellular regulations, such those involved in apoptotic cell death, tumorogenic
and metastatic processes [21,23–25]. Small Hsps are characterized by their complex oligomeric
structures allowing them to interact with each other to form homo and hetero-oligomeric structures of
dynamic size (up to 700 kDa) [76–78]. Moreover, HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 contain several serine
sites that can be phosphorylated by specific kinases, including stress and MAP kinases. The


Chunk 8:
eath, tumorogenic
and metastatic processes [21,23–25]. Small Hsps are characterized by their complex oligomeric
structures allowing them to interact with each other to form homo and hetero-oligomeric structures of
dynamic size (up to 700 kDa) [76–78]. Moreover, HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 contain several serine
sites that can be phosphorylated by specific kinases, including stress and MAP kinases. The
phosphorylation and oligomeric organizations of these proteins are dynamic and deeply modified by
changes in the cellular environment [15,21,37,77,79–83]. Indeed, these structural modifications are
reversible and probably act as sensors of the cellular environment. For example, depending on the
apoptotic inducer, HspB1 differently reorganizes its phosphorylation and oligomerization status
suggesting that multiple strategies are set up by this protein to counteract apoptosis [15,21,51,77].
Changes in small Hsps structure can lead to at least 300 different stoichiometries to allow them to
interact with putative client proteins [84]. Their dynamic structural plasticity would then favor the
recognition of the more appropriated pro-cancerous client proteins, hence allowing the cancer cell to
grow and disseminate. The clients of HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 that could participate in the escape to
death, growth, survival and aggressivity of cancer cells are presented below and in Figure 1.
3.1. Clients as Receptors and Growth Factors Stimulating Cell Growth
HspB1 and HspB5 have been reported to stimulate constitutive cell division by interacting with
different cytoplasmic receptors, such as VEGF, FGF-2 and Her2, leading to an enhanced activity of the
MAPK kinase/MEK/ERK pathway. However, the first report of the interaction of a small heat shock
protein with a receptor concerned HspB1 being an estrogen receptor-beta (ERbeta) associated protein
that could act as a co-repressor of estrogen signaling [85,86]. More recently, it was shown that, in
human breast cancer cells, HspB1 increases He

Chunk 9:
F, FGF-2 and Her2, leading to an enhanced activity of the
MAPK kinase/MEK/ERK pathway. However, the first report of the interaction of a small heat shock
protein with a receptor concerned HspB1 being an estrogen receptor-beta (ERbeta) associated protein
that could act as a co-repressor of estrogen signaling [85,86]. More recently, it was shown that, in
human breast cancer cells, HspB1 increases Her-2/neu protein stability through its ability to chaperone
this receptor. This resulted in an indirect negative effect of HspB1 towards Herceptin susceptibility [40].
Towards growth factors, one interesting small Hsps-client interaction has been detected during retinal
angiogenesis. Indeed, in this tissue, HspB5 can chaperone vascular endothelial growth factor A

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 337
(VEGF-A) and thus avoid its rapid degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery. The phenomenon
results in a drastic stimulation of angiogenesis [87].
Figure 1. HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 client proteins and tumor cell growth. The client
proteins are listed in function of their tumor-prone activities.
Abbreviations are the following: CD10: 100 kDa transmembrane metallo-endopeptidase; CD14: cluster of
differentiation 14; TLR1: Toll-like receptor 1; TLR2: Toll-like receptor 2; TLR3: Toll-like receptor 3; NGF-beta:
Nerve growth factor beta; Her2: Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-2; ERbeta: Estrogen receptor
beta; FGF-2: Fibroblast growth factor 2; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; IKKbeta: inhibitor of
nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit beta; DAXX: death domain-associated protein 6; PKC delta: protein
kinase C delta; RhoA: Ras homolog gene family member A; PKCalpha: protein kinase C alpha; Akt: protein
kinase B; P38: P38 mitogen-activated protein kinases; MK2: Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase 2 (MAPKAPK2); Phk: Phosphorylase kinase (PhK); PTEN: phosphatase and TENsin
homolog; PRKD1: Serine/threonine-protein kinase D1; PPM1A: protein phosph

Chunk 10:
 protein 6; PKC delta: protein
kinase C delta; RhoA: Ras homolog gene family member A; PKCalpha: protein kinase C alpha; Akt: protein
kinase B; P38: P38 mitogen-activated protein kinases; MK2: Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase 2 (MAPKAPK2); Phk: Phosphorylase kinase (PhK); PTEN: phosphatase and TENsin
homolog; PRKD1: Serine/threonine-protein kinase D1; PPM1A: protein phosphatase 1A (formerly 2C),
magnesium-dependent, alpha isoform; TRAF6: tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6; Raf, MEK,
ERK: Mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways; Bax: Bcl-2 associated X protein; PEA-15:
astrocytic phosphoprotein PEA-15; XIAP: X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis; p66Shc: 66 kDa isoform of ShcA
(Src homology 2 domain containing transforming protein 2); G6PD: glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase;
HDM2: Human double minute 2 homolog; IF: intermediate filaments; MAPs: microtubule-associated proteins;
GFAP: Glial fibrillary acidic protein; GRIFIN: galectin-related interfiber protein; HDAC6: histone deacetylase 6;
STAT2 and 3: signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 and 3; HSF-1: heat shock factor 1;
GATA-1: globin transcription factor 1; Snail: zinc finger protein that binds and inhibits E-cadherin promoter to
induce epithelial mesenchymal transformation; eIF4E: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E;
eIF4G: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4G; AUF1: AU-rich element (ARE)-binding protein;
p90 ribosomal S6 kinase; Smad-Smurf2: Smad ubiquitination regulatory factor 2; p27kip1: cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27kip1; Fbx4: Fbox only protein 4.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 338
3.2. Clients Modulating Survival Signaling Pathways and Apoptosis
Apoptosis is a genetically programmed cell death negatively modulated by Hsps [7,38,147].
In contrast to the increased expression of Hsps by environmental insults, such as heat shock,
no up-regulation of these proteins is observed in cells committed to apoptosis and only constitutive

Chunk 11:
protein 4.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 338
3.2. Clients Modulating Survival Signaling Pathways and Apoptosis
Apoptosis is a genetically programmed cell death negatively modulated by Hsps [7,38,147].
In contrast to the increased expression of Hsps by environmental insults, such as heat shock,
no up-regulation of these proteins is observed in cells committed to apoptosis and only constitutively
expressed pre-existing Hsps can be effective. This is particularly the case in human cancer cells where
constitutively expressed small Hsps can counteract apoptotic process mediated by the immune system
or therapeutic drugs. It is now believed that HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 act by interacting with specific
client proteins and modulate their activity in the initiation and execution phases of apoptosis [2,148].
In cells committed to apoptosis, HspB1 is characterized by dynamic reorganization of its structural
organization, particularly at the level of its phosphorylation and oligomerization status. These dynamic
changes are signal transduction-dependent, hence favoring the hypothesis that this chaperone has
multiple strategies, based on its interaction with specific targets, to counteract intrinsic and extrinsic
apoptosis [51,77]. See Figure 2 for an illustration of these activities. Upstream of the intrinsic pathway,
it was shown that by interfering with F-actin disruption and t-Bid translocation, HspB1 indirectly
decreases the efficiency of the release of cytochrome c [149] and Smac-diablo [150] from mitochondria.
Then, it interacts with cytosolic cytochrome c leading to impaired apoptosome and caspase-9
activation [108,151]. Downstream of these events, phosphorylated small oligomers of HspB1 interact
with procaspase-3 and negatively regulate its activation [23,24,106]. It is also worth mentioning that
the interaction of pro-caspase-3 with HspB1 counteracts the rapid degradation of this caspase by the
ubiquitin-protasome machinery [23]. Hence, in addition of being able to i

Chunk 12:
poptosome and caspase-9
activation [108,151]. Downstream of these events, phosphorylated small oligomers of HspB1 interact
with procaspase-3 and negatively regulate its activation [23,24,106]. It is also worth mentioning that
the interaction of pro-caspase-3 with HspB1 counteracts the rapid degradation of this caspase by the
ubiquitin-protasome machinery [23]. Hence, in addition of being able to inhibit a potent caspase
effector, HspB1 has the surprizing property to protect it against a rapid proteolytic degradation. In the
extrinsic pathways, HspB1 counteracts TNFαlpha, Fas and Trail induced apoptosis [7,11,152]. One
well-defined target of HspB1 in the Fas pathway is Daxx [92,153]. Phosphorylated dimers of HspB1
interact with Daxx and indirectly prevent its association with both apoptotic signaling kinase1 (Ask1)
and Fas; a phenomenon that blocks Daxx-mediated apoptosis. The cell survival kinase Akt is also a
major target of HspB1 [95,154]. In fact, HspB1 is now considered as a key component of the Akt
signaling cascade: Akt, BAD, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-3,6 and Forkhead transcription
factors (Figure 2). By phosphorylating Bad, Akt abolishes its pro-apoptotic activity promoting cell
survival. Another interesting protein recognized by HspB1 is the tumor suppressor PTEN that, by
acting as a protein tyrosine phosphatase and a phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PIP) phosphatase, can
negatively regulate the survival PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. In human breast cancer cells expressing
high levels of HspB1, the interaction of PTEN with this chaperone further enhances the survival of
these pathological cells [99]. In fact, it appears that HspB1 interaction with PTEN decreases the level
of this phosphatase and therefore counteracts the PI3K-Akt survival pathway. Consequently, a
geneticaly induced downregulation of HspB1 up-regulates PTEN level and blocks the survival
pathway of cancer cells. This is an interesting example where HspB1 stimulates the degradation o

Chunk 13:
the survival of
these pathological cells [99]. In fact, it appears that HspB1 interaction with PTEN decreases the level
of this phosphatase and therefore counteracts the PI3K-Akt survival pathway. Consequently, a
geneticaly induced downregulation of HspB1 up-regulates PTEN level and blocks the survival
pathway of cancer cells. This is an interesting example where HspB1 stimulates the degradation of a
client protein instead of inhibiting its degradation. In gliomas, HspB1 was also described to participate
in the signaling pathway that promotes cancer cell survival [155,156]. Another study showed that
HspB1 silencing, which destroyed the interaction with PEA-15, coordinately inhibited proliferation and
promoted Fas-induced apoptosis by regulating the PEA-15 molecular switch [13]. Hence, PEA-15 is
an additional survival protein regulated by HspB1.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 339
Figure 2. Cartoon that summarizes the apoptotic and survival pathways controlled by
HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4. Large blue arrows are indicative of an inhibition of the
corresponding pathways consequently of the binding of the clients to HspB1, HspB5 or
HspB4. Black arrows or lines indicate that small Hsps either favorize the indicated
pathways or just override them.
HspB5 and HspB4 are well-known anti-apoptotic polypeptides [7,157] whose major property
is to negatively regulate the pro-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family, Bcl-X and Bax as well as
L
caspase-3 [107]. HspB5 and HspB4 directly interact with caspase-3, Bax and Bcl-XS [107,110].
Moreover, in addition to interacting with these clients, HspB4 and HspB5 suppress their translocation
from the cytosol into mitochondria and thereby prevent stress-induced apoptosis [110]. Similarly,
HspB5 interacts with p53 to sequester its translocation to mitochondria and therefore indirectly inhibits
its pro-apoptotic action towards anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 molecules [111] (see Figure 2). HspB5 was also
found to abrogate calcium-activated Raf/MEK/ERK si

Chunk 14:
HspB4 and HspB5 suppress their translocation
from the cytosol into mitochondria and thereby prevent stress-induced apoptosis [110]. Similarly,
HspB5 interacts with p53 to sequester its translocation to mitochondria and therefore indirectly inhibits
its pro-apoptotic action towards anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 molecules [111] (see Figure 2). HspB5 was also
found to abrogate calcium-activated Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway mediated p53-dependent
apoptosis through inhibition of RAS activation [102]. In addition, both HspB4 and HspB5 could
prevent UVA apoptosis through complex interactions with protein partners involved in regulating
signaling PKCαlpha and Raf/MEK/ERK pathways [96]. Recently HspB5 was also reported to interact
with XIAP, a most potent endogenous suppressor of apoptosis that acts by inhibiting caspases through
a direct binding to these enzymes [113]. Thus, in spite of some common properties towards cell
apoptosis, cell proliferation and tumor metastasis yet unknow molecular mechanisms have been
described to explain the different role played by HspB4 and HspB5 in pancreatic carcinogenesis [54].

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 340
In that respect, it is important to recall that phosphorylation could be the culprit. One example
supporting this point concerns serine 59 phosphorylation which shifts HspB5 activity from anti-apoptotic
to pro-apoptotic since this phosphorylated isoform of HspB5 surprizingly sequesters Bcl-2 and blocks its
translocation to mitochondria [158].
3.3. Senescence
In addition of protecting against programmed cell death, HspB1 can also counteract other host
anti-cancer responses, such as the oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) pathway that acts as roadblock
in cancer development but which is often lost upon cancer progression. The phenomenon which is p53
dependent has been detected by down-regulating HspB1 expression [10]. Indeed, depletion of HspB1
expression in cancer cells induces a senescent-like phenotype characterized by several morpholog

Chunk 15:
er host
anti-cancer responses, such as the oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) pathway that acts as roadblock
in cancer development but which is often lost upon cancer progression. The phenomenon which is p53
dependent has been detected by down-regulating HspB1 expression [10]. Indeed, depletion of HspB1
expression in cancer cells induces a senescent-like phenotype characterized by several morphological
changes. Among them one can note a drastic multi-nucleation which results of the degradation of
HDAC6, a specific client of HspB1 interacting with HspB1 oligomers phosphorylated at the level of
serine 82 [23,24]. HDAC6 is a powerful modifier of carcinogenesis that contributes to oncogenic
pathways activation [159]. A recent study performed in colorectal adenomas also suggests a possible
role of HspB1 in overcoming PI3K/AKT induced OIS in tumours [160]. OIS depends on the activation
of the p53 tumor suppressor protein pathway and induction of p21waf expression leading to cell cycle
arrest [10]. Of interest, HspB1 interacts with HDM2, which serves as ubiquitin ligase (E3) to target
p53 for degradation, and modulates its activity [10,161]. HspB1 down-regulation which leads to a
senescent morphology appears therefore to result of the destabilization and degradation or inactivation
of several client proteins involved in the senescent pathways, such as PI3K/AKT-PTEN, HDAC6 as
well as the p53 stabilizator HDM2.
3.4. Clients Involved in Tumor Progression, Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition, Metastasis
Additional to its role in protecting cancer cells by suppressing host anti-cancer response, such as
apoptosis and senescence, other major pro-cancerous activities of HspB1 are linked to its tumorogenic
property which promotes tumor growth and progression [9,14], invasion of tumor cells into surrounding
tissues and dissemination to form metastatic colonies [17–19,28,29,162,163]. In spite of the fact that
the molecular mechanism that drives HspB1 to promote tumor progression and 

Chunk 16:
response, such as
apoptosis and senescence, other major pro-cancerous activities of HspB1 are linked to its tumorogenic
property which promotes tumor growth and progression [9,14], invasion of tumor cells into surrounding
tissues and dissemination to form metastatic colonies [17–19,28,29,162,163]. In spite of the fact that
the molecular mechanism that drives HspB1 to promote tumor progression and metastasis is still not
well understood, several different HspB1 clients have already been identified that participate in the
achievement of these particular endeaviors. First, it is well known that HspB1 can directly modulate
cytoskeleton integrity and indirectly extracellular matrix organization [23,78,117,118,164–167].
Indeed, recent observations clearly favor an important role played by HspB1 at the level of the cellular
matrix suggesting that the relation between cancer cells and the normal cells that form the niche where
the tumor grow is under the influence of small Hsps [19]. For example, HspB1 overexpression drives
β-catenin from the cell membrane to the cytoplasm where both proteins interact with each other and
consequently modulates cadherin–catenin cell adhesion proteins [131]. β-catenin also interacts with
other proteins including heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), P-cadherin, and caveolin-1. Disease-free
survival were significantly shorter for patients with cytoplasmic expression of β-catenin consequently
of the presence of HspB1. Hence, the interactions of β-catenin with HspB1 appears to play a key role
in the molecular pathways that influence tumor cell survival. Another important role played by

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 341
phosphorylated HspB1 in prostate cancer relates to the TGFbeta-induced activation of MMP-2 (matrix
metalloproteinase type 2), an enzyme that digests components of the extracellular matrix surrounding
tumor masses and subsequently stimulates human prostate cancer cells invasion [168]. TGFbeta-mediated
increase in MMP-2 and

Chunk 17:
val. Another important role played by

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 341
phosphorylated HspB1 in prostate cancer relates to the TGFbeta-induced activation of MMP-2 (matrix
metalloproteinase type 2), an enzyme that digests components of the extracellular matrix surrounding
tumor masses and subsequently stimulates human prostate cancer cells invasion [168]. TGFbeta-mediated
increase in MMP-2 and cell invasion are inhibited in cells devoid of MAPKAPK2 or HspB1 expression
as well as following the inhibition of HspB1 phosphorylation. Hence, both MAPKAPK2 and HspB1
appear necessary for TGFbeta-mediated cell invasion but the responsive clients of phosphorylated
HspB1 acting in this pathway are still unknown. It was also shown that abrogation of 4T1 murine
tumor migration induced by HspB1 down-regulation is associated with the repression of matrix
metalloproteinase 9 expression together with a concomitant upregulation of its antagonist, tissue
inhibitor metalloproteinase 1 [162]. This suggests that several metalloproteinases are under the control
of HspB1. SPARC (secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine), a polypeptide playing an important
role in cell-matrix interactions, is an additional polypeptide that uses HspB1 to modulate cell adhesion
and migration. In colorectal cancer, stromal SPARC expression positively correlates with HspB1
expression and inversely with VEGF-A expression [169]. SPARC was also reported to promote invasion
in gliomas through the up-regulation of the p38 MAPK/MAPKAPK2/HspB1 signaling pathway. This
pathway promotes cancer cell survival by up-regulating the survival kinase pAKT activity through its
interaction with HspB1 [155,156,170]. On the immunological side, high levels of HspB1 are
associated with the repression of proteasome function and poor antigen presentation. By decreasing
HspB1 level the proteasome activity is back to normal as well as the CD8+ T-cell-mediated tumor
killing and the memory responses [171].
Back in 1997, a direct c

Chunk 18:
ting the survival kinase pAKT activity through its
interaction with HspB1 [155,156,170]. On the immunological side, high levels of HspB1 are
associated with the repression of proteasome function and poor antigen presentation. By decreasing
HspB1 level the proteasome activity is back to normal as well as the CD8+ T-cell-mediated tumor
killing and the memory responses [171].
Back in 1997, a direct correlation between elevated level of HspB1 in the later stage of tumor
progression and the invasive and metastatic potential of human breast cancer cells was confirmed
in vivo in an assay measuring the number of lung metastases in mice injected with HspB1-transfected
cells [17]. This study also reported that HspB1 overexpression decreases cell motility, but enhances
invasiveness, adhesion, and growth in Matrigel. Consequently, suppression of HspB1 expression
increases cell motility, but decreases in vitro invasiveness. Several recent studies have now confirmed
that HspB1 is a key parameter in the emergence of metastasis [19]. A recent striking example is the
promoting effect of HspB1 in breast cancer cells to metastasize and grow in the skeleton as bone
tumours [12]. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental parameter that
controls metastasis formation, however the mechanisms regulating the phenomenon are still not well
understood. In that respect, HspB1 participates in the maintenance of breast cancer stem cells through
regulation of EMT and NF-κB transcription factor [31]. In prostate cancer, HspB1 also appears as an
important player that promotes EMT since its depletion is associated with decreased cell migration,
invasion, and MMP-2 activity [6]. The mechanisms involved in the promotion of the metastatic
phenotype by HspB1 are not solved yet. It has been proposed, that HspB1 could modulate the
expression of pro-metastatic genes [19], such as those dependent of the STAT3/Twist signaling [6].
Of interest, HspB1 and Twist expression are both elevated 

Chunk 19:
its depletion is associated with decreased cell migration,
invasion, and MMP-2 activity [6]. The mechanisms involved in the promotion of the metastatic
phenotype by HspB1 are not solved yet. It has been proposed, that HspB1 could modulate the
expression of pro-metastatic genes [19], such as those dependent of the STAT3/Twist signaling [6].
Of interest, HspB1 and Twist expression are both elevated in high-grade prostate cancer tumors and
HspB1 enhances the binding of the transcription factor STAT3 to the promoter of the Twist gene [6],
an event that subsequently upregulates N-cadherin and downregulates E-cadherin expression,
two hallmarks of EMT. However, how HspB1 mediates these effects is still not known
(see below paragraph 3.7.1.).

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 342
HspB5 is well known for its involvment in cytoskeleton integrity [117,128]. Moreover, it also plays
a role, at least in the kidney, for maintaining tissue integrity by interacting with Ksp-cadherin-16 and
promoting the connection of this polypeptide to the cytoskeleton [132]. In cancer pathologies, HspB5
has been described to promote cell migration and invasion by modulating signal transduction pathways.
For example, it induces EGF- and anchorage-independent growth of human breast basal-like tumors
through the constitutive activation of the MAPK kinase/ERK (MEK/ERK) pathway [53]. Moreover,
HspB5 can also act as an oncoprotein since, in nude mice, it has the intriguing property to transform
immortalized human mammary epithelial cells in invasive mammary carcinomas that have the same
aspect as basal-like breast tumors [53,172]. HspB5 expression in basal-like breast tumors is associated
to poor patient survival independently of other prognostic markers. At least in pancreatic cancer cells,
these properties are apparently not shared by HspB4 that acts, in spite of its protective property, as a
negative regulator of carcinogenesis that retards cell migration and prevents tumor growth [73].
3.5. Clients

Chunk 20:
east tumors [53,172]. HspB5 expression in basal-like breast tumors is associated
to poor patient survival independently of other prognostic markers. At least in pancreatic cancer cells,
these properties are apparently not shared by HspB4 that acts, in spite of its protective property, as a
negative regulator of carcinogenesis that retards cell migration and prevents tumor growth [73].
3.5. Clients on Cell Surface and Outside of Cells, Immunosurveillance, Angiogenesis and Autoantibodies
In spite of their major intracellular localization, recent reports mention that, similarly to the large
Hsps such as Hsp70 [173], the small Hsps can localize in plasma membrane and be exported in the
extracellular milieu [174–176]. Of interest, high levels of HspB1 cell surface expression were found to
correlate with tumor growth and cell ability to metastasize [18]. Hence, do small Hsps, as the high
molecular weight Hsps, associate with immunogenic peptides to bring an immune response to cancer
cells [177] or are immunosupressive [178]? In that regard, an immunoregulatory activity has been
associated to extracellular HspB1 that could contribute to immunopathology through the ability of this
chaperone to interact with monocyte-derived dentritic cells and alter their activity, hence favoring
immunosuppression. Extracellular HspB1 has also been described to act as a signaling molecule that
activates NF-κB in macrophages [179]. In addition, a proangiogenic effect of HspB1 has been recently
reported that depends on NF-κB activation [105]. Indeed, recombinant human HspB1 can recognize
and interact with Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) at the surface of human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMECs) grown as monolayers or spheroids and favors spheroid sprouting, NF-κB dependent VEGF
gene transcription and promotes secretion of VEGF-activating VEGF receptor type 2 and angiogenesis.
Hence, TLR3 can now be considered as a novel HspB1 interacting protein that indirectly promotes
tumor growth.
An impo

Chunk 21:
 with Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) at the surface of human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMECs) grown as monolayers or spheroids and favors spheroid sprouting, NF-κB dependent VEGF
gene transcription and promotes secretion of VEGF-activating VEGF receptor type 2 and angiogenesis.
Hence, TLR3 can now be considered as a novel HspB1 interacting protein that indirectly promotes
tumor growth.
An important point to keep in mind relates to the fact that circulating extracellular small Hsps can
have pathology-dependent roles, similarly to their intracellular counterparts, that is they can either be
deleterious or beneficial to patients. For example, circulating HspB1 is well known for its atheroprotective
effect [176]. It also appears associated with micro- and macrovascular complications in type1 diabetic
patients and considered as a novel marker for diabetic neuropathy [180]. The role of these extracellular
proteins in normal physiological conditions will remain to be determined before therapeutic approaches
are launched to target these circulating Hsps.
Another intriguing phenomenon concerns the presence of antibodies targeting HspB1 and HspB5 in
the aqueous humor of normal tension glaucoma patients [181]. More surprizing is the fact that exogenously
applied HspB1 antibody can penetrate in human retina neuronal cells and promote neuronal apoptosis
by counteracting HspB1 anti-apoptotic activity [182]. This suggests that autoantibodies to small Hsps

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 343
may impair cell survival, an activity that could be beneficial to cancer patients and be useful parameters
in tumor diagnosis [26]. Circulating Hsps and anti-Hsps antibodies are now considered as being part of
the recently defined ―stress observation system‖ [173].
3.6. Clients Involved in Inflammation and in Controling Intracellular Redox State
Fledgling tumors are known to hijack inflammation and use it to accelerate the progression towards
full-blown cancer [183]. Activation of NF-κB 

Chunk 22:
ful parameters
in tumor diagnosis [26]. Circulating Hsps and anti-Hsps antibodies are now considered as being part of
the recently defined ―stress observation system‖ [173].
3.6. Clients Involved in Inflammation and in Controling Intracellular Redox State
Fledgling tumors are known to hijack inflammation and use it to accelerate the progression towards
full-blown cancer [183]. Activation of NF-κB and a network of signaling molecules, which are key
modulators in driving inflammatory cells to cancer cells, facilitate angiogenesis and promote the
growth, invasion, and metastasis of tumors. In that respect, it is of great interest to note that HspB1 is
essential for pro-inflammatory cell signaling and the expression of pro-inflammatory genes [184]. This
protein is indeed required for both IL-1 and TNF-induced signaling pathways for which the most
upstream common signaling protein is the pivotal kinase TAK1. Hence, downstream signalling by p38
MAPK, JNK and their activators (MKK-3, -4, -6, -7) and IKKbeta as well as expression of the
pro-inflammatory mediators, cyclooxygenase-2, IL-6, and IL-8 are all dependent on HspB1. Unfortunately,
the client(s) targeted by HspB1 are still unknown but should reside at the level or more upstream of
TAK1. A surprizing finding has been made recently concerning HspB5 interaction, in the plasma of
patient suffering of multiple sclerosis, with at least 70 different pro-inflammatory mediators (acute
phase proteins, members of the complement cascade, and coagulation factors). Interaction with HspB5
reduces the concentration of these polypeptides leading to decreased inflammation [185]. Whether
such a phenomenon occurs in patients suffering from cancer pathologies should urgently be tested.
Another anti-inflammatory pathway linked to extracellular HspB5 concerns the activation of an
immune-regulatory response in macrophages via endosomal/phagosomal CD14 and Toll-like receptors 1
and 2, two new HspB5 interacting proteins [104]. These reports c

Chunk 23:
ding to decreased inflammation [185]. Whether
such a phenomenon occurs in patients suffering from cancer pathologies should urgently be tested.
Another anti-inflammatory pathway linked to extracellular HspB5 concerns the activation of an
immune-regulatory response in macrophages via endosomal/phagosomal CD14 and Toll-like receptors 1
and 2, two new HspB5 interacting proteins [104]. These reports clearly show that HspB1 and HspB5
act differently towards inflammation.
Inflammation is also linked to oxidative stress and, in this regard, expression of HspB1 or HspB5 is
known for quite a while to induce a pro-reducing state in cells [78,83,115,152,186–197]. Indeed,
decreased levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide as well as iron uptake are
observed in HspB1 and HspB5 expressing cells concomitantly to the upholding of mitochondrial
membrane potential (∆Φm) and glutathione in its reducing form [115,152,186,187,194,198].
Consequently, protein oxidation, lipid peroxidation, DNA damages and cytoskeleton architecture
disruption by oxidative stress are attenuated [186,189,196,199,200]. At least in the case of HspB1,
these protective effects appear to result of the up-regulated activity of anti-oxidant enzymes [115,193],
the major one being glucose 6-phosphate deshydrogenease (G6PD), a client of HspB1 [25,116], an
enzyme that provides the reducing power of the cell consequently of its ability to transform NADP+ in
NADPH+H+ [201], hence leading to oxidoresistance [202]. We recently showed that highly
phosphorylated small homo-oligomers of HspB1 are responsive of the interaction of this chaperone
with G6PD [25]. Consequently, drugs that interfere with the pro-reducing capability of HspB1 and
HspB5 by interfering with their interaction with anti-oxidant enzymes may improve the killing
efficiency of anti-cancer therapeutic drugs or conditions which depend on the intracellular redox state
or the production of reactive oxygen species for their action, such as

Chunk 24:
 the interaction of this chaperone
with G6PD [25]. Consequently, drugs that interfere with the pro-reducing capability of HspB1 and
HspB5 by interfering with their interaction with anti-oxidant enzymes may improve the killing
efficiency of anti-cancer therapeutic drugs or conditions which depend on the intracellular redox state
or the production of reactive oxygen species for their action, such as the Hsp90 inhibitor 17AAG or X-
ray irradiation [196,203].

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 344
3.7. Clients Regulating Gene Expression
3.7.1. Transcription
STAT3 is a crucial transcription factor whose persistant activation is involved in the maintenance
and anti-apoptotic status of many cancerous cells through the activation of anti-apoptotic genes, such
as the one encoding survivin [204–207]. Interaction between STAT3 and HspB1, reported already
in 2004 [208], was confirmed recently [23,135]. STAT3 interacts with many different polypeptides
and is transcriptionaly activated by tyrosine phosphorylation by either Jack2, c-Src, epidermial growth
factor or other tyrosine kinases in response to various cytokines and growth factors [209,210]. It then
forms homo- or hetero-dimers that translocate to the cell nucleus and bind to DNA. Of great interest,
down-regulation of HspB1 expression decreases the level of phosphorylated STAT3 [23]. This
suggests that the half-life of activated STAT3 is dramatically expanded through its interaction with
HspB1. Hence, the transcriptional activation of STAT3, consequently of its phosphorylation and
nuclear translocation, appears to require the presence of HspB1 [23]. Moreover, HspB1 has also been
reported to be essential for the binding of STAT3 to the Twist promoter, hence promoting EMT and
metastasis [6]. However, the role of HspB1 towards STAT3 is probably more complex than it has been
originally thought since, depending upon the mutational background of the tumor, STAT3 can either
be pro-oncogenic or have a tumor suppressor activity [21

Chunk 25:
ence of HspB1 [23]. Moreover, HspB1 has also been
reported to be essential for the binding of STAT3 to the Twist promoter, hence promoting EMT and
metastasis [6]. However, the role of HspB1 towards STAT3 is probably more complex than it has been
originally thought since, depending upon the mutational background of the tumor, STAT3 can either
be pro-oncogenic or have a tumor suppressor activity [211]. For example, in colorectal cancer cells
STAT3 down-regulates Snail-1 expression levels and thus suppresses EMT and metastasis [212].
Hence, depending on the tumor, the relation between HspB1 and STAT3 may have different
consequences. Whether HspB1 phosphorylation plays a role in this phenomenon will have to be tested.
HspB1 also interacts with the transcription factor STAT2 and avoid its degradation by the ubiquitin
proteasome pathway [23]. STAT2 is mainly involved in the control of anti-viral responses through its
activation by interferon-γ [205]. STAT2 was shown to specifically interact with serine 78 and 82
phosphorylated HspB1 large oligomers [23,24]. HspB1 also plays a role towards GATA1, a
transcription factor essential for erythroid differentiation, which is heavily mutated in almost all
megakaryoblastic leukemias in patients with Down syndrome [213]. HspB1 interacts with GATA1 and
down-regulates its content and activity by inducing its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation
during terminal erythroid differentiation [137]. The role played by HspB1 towards GATA1 in these
pathologies will have to be determined. An additional target of HspB1 is HSF1 (heat shock factor 1), the
transcription factor responsible for Hsps expression that plays an important role in tumorogenesis [4].
In that regard, HspB1 is involved in SUMO-2/3 modification of HSF1 [136]. In the nucleus, large
oligomers of HspB1 interact with HSF1 and induce its modification by SUMO-2/3 on lysine 298. This
modication results of the interaction of HspB1 with the SUMO-E2-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and
tak

Chunk 26:
), the
transcription factor responsible for Hsps expression that plays an important role in tumorogenesis [4].
In that regard, HspB1 is involved in SUMO-2/3 modification of HSF1 [136]. In the nucleus, large
oligomers of HspB1 interact with HSF1 and induce its modification by SUMO-2/3 on lysine 298. This
modication results of the interaction of HspB1 with the SUMO-E2-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and
takes place downstream of HSF1 phosphorylation. This modification does not affect HSF1
DNA-binding ability but blocks its transactivation function. Future studies will have to test whether
SUMO-2/3 favors HSF1 activity as a signal modulator stimulating kinase activity, regulating energy
metabolism and permitting the development of polyploidy in cancer cells or as an inhibitor of
transcription which, in cooperation with NuRD family factors, can repress genes that oppose
metastasis [4].

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 345
HspB5 has not yet been described to play a role in transcriptional modifications favoring the
development of cancer cells. In contrast, HspB4, which can act as an inhibitor of tumorogenesis, has
been proposed to halt cell transformation and retard cell migration by modulating the expression and
activity of the transcription factor AP-1 [54].
3.7.2. Translation
HspB1 is well known for its activity as an inhibitor of translation during heat shock that limits the
accumulation of unfolded proteins. In heat shock treated cells, HspB1 interacts with the initiation
factor eIF4G, but not with the other factors of the cap-binding initiation complex such as eIF4E,
eIF4A, eIF4E kinase Mnk1 and poly (A)-binding protein [138]. HspB1-eIF4G interaction facilitates
the dissociation of cap-initiation complexes and promotes translation inhibition. In cancer cells, active
translation machinery is a prerequisite for cell growth and proliferation and once again HspB1 plays a
major role in the protein translational initiation process. A study performed in prostate cancer showed
t

Chunk 27:
E kinase Mnk1 and poly (A)-binding protein [138]. HspB1-eIF4G interaction facilitates
the dissociation of cap-initiation complexes and promotes translation inhibition. In cancer cells, active
translation machinery is a prerequisite for cell growth and proliferation and once again HspB1 plays a
major role in the protein translational initiation process. A study performed in prostate cancer showed
that HspB1 up-regulation, which is particularly intense after androgen withdrawal, confers broad-spectrum
treatment resistance including chemotherapy. Analysis of the enhanced cell survival during cell stress
induced by castration or chemotherapy resistance revealed that it resulted mainly of HspB1 protection
of the protein synthesis initiation process. In that context, HspB1 was found to interact with the
translation initiation factor eIF4E [139]. Moreover, HspB1 downregulation decreased eIF4E expression
at the protein, but not mRNA, level. The phenomenon clearly shows that HspB1 acts as a chaperone
that stabilizes eIF4E half-life by counteracting its degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.
Hence, by protecting translational initiation HspB1 can indirectly enhance cancer cell survival through
an efficient translation of mRNAs encoding polypeptides. No activities of HspB5 or HspB4 have yet
been detected in that particular field of investigation.
4. Peptides, Natural Molecules and Drugs that Inhibit the Proliferation of Human Cancer Cells
through Their Ability to Interact with Small Hsps, Therapeutic Approaches
Through their ability to interact with each other small Hsps form complex homo- and
hetero-oligomeric structures that deeply modify the activity of the parental molecules. For example, it
has been observed that some exogenous mutants of HspB1 can be dominant negative knocking out the
activity of endogenous wild-type HspB1 through formation of inactivated hetero-oligomeric
complexes that cannot recognize protein partners. In that respect, the substitution of th

Chunk 28:
m complex homo- and
hetero-oligomeric structures that deeply modify the activity of the parental molecules. For example, it
has been observed that some exogenous mutants of HspB1 can be dominant negative knocking out the
activity of endogenous wild-type HspB1 through formation of inactivated hetero-oligomeric
complexes that cannot recognize protein partners. In that respect, the substitution of the only cysteine
residue in HspB1 sequence by an alanine is very efficient [108,214]. We also recently reported the
drastic dominant negative effect mediated by the R120G mutant of HspB5 towards HspB1 [78].
Hence, a mutated small Hsp can alter the protective activity of other members of this family of chaperones
expressed in the same cell. This probably occurs through a modifcation of their ability to recognize
specific client polypeptides [25,78]. In spite of these observations, the use of mutants as therapeutic
approaches to modulate the activity of some small Hsps is not a realistic therapeutic approach. On the
contrary, the use of peptides derived from crucial domains that mimick their structural organization
and chaperone activity is more reasonable. Only few examples have been reported in the litterature
about the effect of peptides mimicking HspB1 and HspB5 activities. One example concerns the interaction
of HspB1 with seven amino acids of the PKC delta-V5 heptapeptide region (residues 668 to 674,

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 346
E-F-Q-F-L-D-I) of Protein Kinase C delta (PKCdelta). This PKC region can sensitize human cancer cells
by sequestring HspB1, hence inhibiting its interaction with pathological protein partners [93,200].
This resulted in the inhibition of HspB1-mediated resistance against drugs, such as cisplatin and DNA
damaging agents. On the other hand, peptides can stimulate small Hsps activity such as in the case of
HspB5 where peptides derived from crucial domains of this chaperone mimicked its positive action
against the fibrillation of amyloidogen

Chunk 29:
ts interaction with pathological protein partners [93,200].
This resulted in the inhibition of HspB1-mediated resistance against drugs, such as cisplatin and DNA
damaging agents. On the other hand, peptides can stimulate small Hsps activity such as in the case of
HspB5 where peptides derived from crucial domains of this chaperone mimicked its positive action
against the fibrillation of amyloidogenic proteins [215]. The search for peptides that, instead of
mimicking small Hsps, directly modulate their interactions with client proteins is another approach that
can lead to the discovery of potent peptidomimetic drugs. Peptide aptamers belong to this second class
of peptides [16,216–220]. In that regard, we have described HspB1 interacting peptide aptamers that
could either down-regulate or stimulate the anti-apoptotic and cytoprotective activities of this stress
protein, hence confirming the importance of the structural organization of this chaperone [16,221].
Moreover, in vivo head and neck tumor xenograft studies revealed that aptamers could reduce tumor
growth more efficiently than HspB1 depletion [16]. Aptamer poisoning altered HspB1 structural
organization and probably its abberant pro-cancerous interactome. These observations support
the hypothesis that, in addition of drugs, anti-senses or RNAis strategies that decrease HspB1
levels [6,13,222], therapeutic chemical drugs could be designed to directly destabilize small Hsps
oligomeric structure and their pro-cancerous interactome networks.
Drugs that decrease HspB1 expression are well known but usually poorly specific. One can cite
quercitin [223], berberin derivatives (EPO Patent 0813872-A1), paclitaxel [224], KNK437 [225]
and interferon-γ which suppresses HspB1 basal transcription and promoter activity thus
enhancing hyperthermia-induced tumor cell death in vitro and tumor suppression in vivo [226,227].
Far more interesting drugs are those that directly interact with HspB1 and modulate its activity, here
are so

Chunk 30:
ne can cite
quercitin [223], berberin derivatives (EPO Patent 0813872-A1), paclitaxel [224], KNK437 [225]
and interferon-γ which suppresses HspB1 basal transcription and promoter activity thus
enhancing hyperthermia-induced tumor cell death in vitro and tumor suppression in vivo [226,227].
Far more interesting drugs are those that directly interact with HspB1 and modulate its activity, here
are some of them:
(1) Biphenyl isooxazoles such as 5-(5-ethyl-2-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenyl)-4-(4-methoxyphenyl)
isoxazole (KRIBB3) inhibit tumor cell migration and invasion by blocking protein kinase
C-dependent phosphorylation of HspB1 through their direct binding to HspB1 [228].
(2) RP101 (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-deoxyuridine, BVDU, brivudine), a 2'-deoxyuridine derivative
(thymidine analogue). This well-known anti-viral drug, particularly efficient againt Herpes
simplex virus (HSV-1) and varicella zoster virus (VZV), was recently reported to drastically
enhance the efficiency of human pancreatic cancer chemotherapy. RP101 acts by inhibiting
HspB1 interaction with pro-cancerous binding partners, such as cytochrome c, pro-caspase-3,
and Akt1 [229]. This results in a stimulation of the activity of caspase-9 and apoptosis
efficiency. In addition of being incorporated into viral DNAs and inhibiting the action of DNA
polymerase and viral replication, RP101 can bind to a specific site of the N-terminal domain of
HspB1 characterized by two phenylalanine residues (Phe29 and Phe33). This probably
interferes with the dynamic oligomerization of this chaperone and its ability to recognize client
proteins. In addition of being approved as an anti-viral drug, RP101 efficiency towards
pancreatic cancer patients is actually in clinical phase II/III. Of interest, an increased efficiency
has recently been reported for novel HspB1-targetting derivatives of RP101 [230].
(3) Clerodane diterpenoids form a class of terpene derivatives biosynthesized in plants, particularly
those of the Lamiaceae family. Amo

Chunk 31:
. In addition of being approved as an anti-viral drug, RP101 efficiency towards
pancreatic cancer patients is actually in clinical phase II/III. Of interest, an increased efficiency
has recently been reported for novel HspB1-targetting derivatives of RP101 [230].
(3) Clerodane diterpenoids form a class of terpene derivatives biosynthesized in plants, particularly
those of the Lamiaceae family. Among them, neo-clerodane diterpenoids from Salvia spp. were

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 347
recently described as compounds inhibiting the proliferation of several human cancer cell lines.
Chemical proteomics approach analyzing the cellular interactome of a representative clerodane
diterpenoid molecule, hardwickiic acid (HAA), revealed HspB1 as a major HAA interacting
protein partner in U937 leukemic cells [231]. The interaction was confirmed by several other
approaches, including surface plasmon resonance measurements, limited proteolysis, and
biochemical assays. Hence, the antitumor potential of clerodane diterpenoids may be linked to
the inhibition HspB1 oncogenic properties. Moreover, this observation may be crucial for the
future discovery of potent HspB1 diterpenoid-based chemical inhibitors.
Analyzing crucial modifications in the structure of small Hsps that play a role in cancer pathologies
is another approach that could lead to the discovery of new drugs. In that respect, argpyrimidine
modification could be of interest since this modification decreases HspB1 ability to bind cytochrome c
and consequently alters its anti-apoptotic property [109]. The phenomenon is probably linked to the
important structural role played by arginine residues in the conserved -crystallin domain of small
Hsps [76,78,232,233].
5. Conclusions
Additional to their up-regulated levels and broad molecular chaperone activities in stress
conditions, small Hsps are now described to have an incredible number of fundamental functions in
unstressed human cells [5,27,83,234]. The phenomenon is 

Chunk 32:
bly linked to the
important structural role played by arginine residues in the conserved -crystallin domain of small
Hsps [76,78,232,233].
5. Conclusions
Additional to their up-regulated levels and broad molecular chaperone activities in stress
conditions, small Hsps are now described to have an incredible number of fundamental functions in
unstressed human cells [5,27,83,234]. The phenomenon is particularly intense in pathological cells
where they show an apparent high level of constitutive expression. These multiple cellular functions
result of the fundamental property of Hsps, first discovered in stressed cells, which consists in their
interaction with client polypeptides to control folding. This activity can have several consequences: if
the folding of the clients is not adapted to cellular conditions, small Hsps can participate in their
refolding or degradation. Small Hsps can also artificially maintain their half-life by permanently
interacting with them. The folding property of small Hsps can also modulate the activity of enzymes
and/or trigger specific modifications to better adapt them to changes in cell physiology. Hence, the
polypeptides that are controled by small Hsps could have crucial functions, particularly in pathological
cells. For example, the protective role of small Hsps towards some clients could be beneficial against
cell degeneration [22]. In contrast, other clients can be deleterious consequently of their ability to help
cells to evade death and proliferate, such as cancer cells. In vew of all these observations, it was
concluded that small Hsps are therapeutic targets. However, they are tricky ones since, depending on
the pathology, their activities will have to be either stimulated or abolished.
The major drawback to understand the chaperone functions of small Hsps is the still not well
characterized role played by their highly complex and dynamic combinatorial phospho-oligomeric
structures that allow them to interact with a specific poly

Chunk 33:
e therapeutic targets. However, they are tricky ones since, depending on
the pathology, their activities will have to be either stimulated or abolished.
The major drawback to understand the chaperone functions of small Hsps is the still not well
characterized role played by their highly complex and dynamic combinatorial phospho-oligomeric
structures that allow them to interact with a specific polypeptide in a define cellular condition. Despite
this unsolved problem, the number of proteins that are nowdays discovered to interact with small Hsps
is growing exponentially. Here, we have analyzed the putative pro-cancerous role of the major
polypeptides that interact with HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4. It is of particular interest to note that these
proteins are mainly engaged in processes that drastically modulate the development of tumors and their
metastatic dissemination. For example, they can promote constitutive cell division by interacting with
cytoplasmic receptors (VEGF, FGF-2, Her2) leading to enhanced activity of MAPK kinase/MEK/ERK

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 348
pathway. HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 are also particularly effective in inhibiting extrinsic and intrinsic
apoptosis by using their own specific strategies. In that respect, they knock down key pro-apoptotic
factors (cytochrome c, caspase-3, pro-apoptotic Bax, BclXs, tBid, P53, DAXX) and stimulate or
override the anti-apoptotic activity of other factors (PEA-15, XIAP). Another important phenomenon
highly stimulated by HspB1 is the survival pathway while the oncogene induced senescence (OIS)
pathway appears inhibited. In that respect, the major targets are PTEN, Akt and the transcription factor
STAT3 that induces expression of anti-apoptotic genes and promotes survival through cross talk with
the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway [204,235]. Finally, HspB1 and HspB5 have been described to promote
tumor progression, EMT and metastasis. In that regard, small Hsps are well-known regulators of the
cytoskeleton and cellu

Chunk 34:
ted. In that respect, the major targets are PTEN, Akt and the transcription factor
STAT3 that induces expression of anti-apoptotic genes and promotes survival through cross talk with
the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway [204,235]. Finally, HspB1 and HspB5 have been described to promote
tumor progression, EMT and metastasis. In that regard, small Hsps are well-known regulators of the
cytoskeleton and cellular matrix organization. Other crucial targets are SPARC, matrix metalloproteinase
type 2 and β-catenin as well as still unknown ones involved in the up-regulation of pro-metastatic
genes through STAT3/Twist signaling. Recently, reports have mentioned that tumor growth and cell
ability to metastasize correlated with a fraction of the cellular content of HspB1 being localized in the
plasma membrane and extracellular milieu, leading to a possible immunoregulatory or signaling
activity such as the proangiogenic effect recently described to be associated to this circulating protein.
Many other polypeptides are targeted, including modulators of inflammation, transcription and
translation factors, regulators of protein stability and anti-oxidant enzymes, that all can have an impact
on the development and maintenance of tumors. Hence, these studies lead to the apparent view that
small Hsps interactomes could be controled by some cancer cells to promote their development.
Further analysis of the phosphorylation patterns of HspB1, HspB5 and HspB4 will be required to
test whether these modifications modulate their ability to negatively or positively modulate the
pro-cancerous activity of their clients. Another parameter that generates even more complexity is the
fact that, when expressed in the same cells, small Hsps can interact [236,237] and form multiple
combinatorial chimeric hetero-oligomeric complexes that are differentially phosphorylated, such as
HspB1 and HspB5 which are highly prone to interact [25,78]. Nothing is known concerning
the interactomes of these chimeric structur

Chunk 35:
ir clients. Another parameter that generates even more complexity is the
fact that, when expressed in the same cells, small Hsps can interact [236,237] and form multiple
combinatorial chimeric hetero-oligomeric complexes that are differentially phosphorylated, such as
HspB1 and HspB5 which are highly prone to interact [25,78]. Nothing is known concerning
the interactomes of these chimeric structures that seem to have lost the properties associated to the
parental homo-oligomers. Hence, these examples clearly illustrate the complexity associated to the
interaction of small Hsps with defined polypeptides targets. More in-depth structural studies are urgently
needed before comprehensive interactomes could be elaborated and used to search for specific
therapeutic anti-cancer drugs.
Acklowledgments
We thank Patrick Mehlen for his continuous support.
Author Contributions
The bibliographical data were analyzed by André-Patrick Arrigo and Benjamin Gibert.
André-Patrick Arrigo conceived and wrote the review and created the figures.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 349
References
1. Sherman, M.; Multhoff, G. Heat shock proteins in cancer. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 2007, 1113,
192–201.
2. Ciocca, D.R.; Arrigo, A.P.; Calderwood, S.K. Heat shock proteins and heat shock factor 1 in
carcinogenesis and tumor development: An update. Arch. Toxicol. 2013, 87, 19–48.
3. Trepel, J.; Mollapour, M.; Giaccone, G.; Neckers, L. Targeting the dynamic HSP90 complex in
cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2010, 10, 537–549.
4. Calderwood, S.K. HSF1, a versatile factor in tumorogenesis. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12,
1102–1107.
5. Arrigo, A.P.; Simon, S.; Gibert, B.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Nivon, M.; Czekalla, A.; Guillet, D.;
Moulin, M.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Vicart, P. Hsp27 (HspB1) and alphaB-crystallin (HspB5) as
therapeutic targets. FEBS Lett. 2007, 581, 3665–3674.
6. Shiota, M.; Bishop, J.L.; Nip, K.M.; Zardan, A.; Takeuchi, A.; Cordonnier, T.; Beraldi, E.;

Chunk 36:
ersatile factor in tumorogenesis. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12,
1102–1107.
5. Arrigo, A.P.; Simon, S.; Gibert, B.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Nivon, M.; Czekalla, A.; Guillet, D.;
Moulin, M.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Vicart, P. Hsp27 (HspB1) and alphaB-crystallin (HspB5) as
therapeutic targets. FEBS Lett. 2007, 581, 3665–3674.
6. Shiota, M.; Bishop, J.L.; Nip, K.M.; Zardan, A.; Takeuchi, A.; Cordonnier, T.; Beraldi, E.;
Bazov, J.; Fazli, L.; Chi, K.; et al. Hsp27 regulates epithelial mesenchymal transition, metastasis,
and circulating tumor cells in prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2013, 73, 3109–3119.
7. Mehlen, P.; Schulze-Osthoff, K.; Arrigo, A.P. Small stress proteins as novel regulators of
apoptosis. Heat shock protein 27 blocks Fas/APO-1- and staurosporine-induced cell death.
J. Biol. Chem. 1996, 271, 16510–16514.
8. Kamradt, M.C.; Chen, F.; Cryns, V.L. The small heat shock protein alpha B-crystallin negatively
regulates cytochrome c- and caspase-8-dependent activation of caspase-3 by inhibiting its
autoproteolytic maturation. J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 16059–16063.
9. Garrido, C.; Brunet, M.; Didelot, C.; Zermati, Y.; Schmitt, E.; Kroemer, G. Heat shock proteins
27 and 70: Anti-apoptotic proteins with tumorigenic properties. Cell Cycle 2006, 5, 22.
10. O’Callaghan-Sunol, C.; Gabai, V.L.; Sherman, M.Y. Hsp27 modulates p53 signaling and suppresses
cellular senescence. Cancer Res. 2007, 67, 11779–11788.
11. Zhuang, H.; Jiang, W.; Cheng, W.; Qian, K.; Dong, W.; Cao, L.; Huang, Q.; Li, S.; Dou, F.;
Chiu, J.F.; et al. Down-regulation of HSP27 sensitizes TRAIL-resistant tumor cell to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Lung Cancer 2009, 68, 27–38.
12. Gibert, B.; Eckel, B.; Gonin, V.; Goldschneider, D.; Fombonne, J.; Deux, B.; Mehlen, P.;
Arrigo, A.P.; Clezardin, P.; Diaz-Latoud, C. Targeting heat shock protein 27 (HspB1) interferes
with bone metastasis and tumour formation in vivo. Br. J. Cancer 2012, 107, 63–70.
13. Hayashi, N.; Peacock, J.W.; Beraldi, E.; Zoubeidi, A.; Gleave, M.E.; Ong, C.J. Hsp27 si

Chunk 37:
ptosis. Lung Cancer 2009, 68, 27–38.
12. Gibert, B.; Eckel, B.; Gonin, V.; Goldschneider, D.; Fombonne, J.; Deux, B.; Mehlen, P.;
Arrigo, A.P.; Clezardin, P.; Diaz-Latoud, C. Targeting heat shock protein 27 (HspB1) interferes
with bone metastasis and tumour formation in vivo. Br. J. Cancer 2012, 107, 63–70.
13. Hayashi, N.; Peacock, J.W.; Beraldi, E.; Zoubeidi, A.; Gleave, M.E.; Ong, C.J. Hsp27 silencing
coordinately inhibits proliferation and promotes Fas-induced apoptosis by regulating the PEA-15
molecular switch. Cell Death Differ. 2012, 19, 990–1002.
14. Garrido, C.; Fromentin, A.; Bonnotte, B.; Favre, N.; Moutet, M.; Arrigo, A.P.; Mehlen, P.;
Solary, E. Heat shock protein 27 enhances the tumorigenicity of immunogenic rat colon
carcinoma cell clones. Cancer Res. 1998, 58, 5495–5499.
15. Bruey, J.M.; Paul, C.; Fromentin, A.; Hilpert, S.; Arrigo, A.P.; Solary, E.; Garrido, C.
Differential regulation of HSP27 oligomerization in tumor cells grown in vitro and in vivo.
Oncogene 2000, 19, 4855–4863.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 350
16. Gibert, B.; Hadchity, E.; Czekalla, A.; Aloy, M.T.; Colas, P.; Rodriguez-Lafrasse, C.; Arrigo, A.P.;
Diaz-Latoud, C. Inhibition of heat shock protein 27 (HspB1) tumorigenic functions by peptide
aptamers. Oncogene 2011, 34, 3672–3681.
17. Lemieux, P.; Oesterreich, S.; Lawrence, J.A.; Steeg, P.S.; Hilsenbeck, S.G.; Harvey, J.M.;
Fuqua, S.A. The small heat shock protein hsp27 increases invasiveness but decreases motility of
breast cancer cells. Invasion Metastasis 1997, 17, 113–123.
18. Bausero, M.A.; Page, D.T.; Osinaga, E.; Asea, A. Surface expression of Hsp25 and Hsp72
differentially regulates tumor growth and metastasis. Tumour Biol. 2004, 25, 243–251.
19. Nagaraja, G.N.; Kaur, P.; Asea, A. Role of human and mouse HspB1 in metastasis.
Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1142–1150.
20. Calderwood, S.K.; Khaleque, M.A.; Sawyer, D.B.; Ciocca, D.R. Heat shock proteins in cancer:
Chaperones of tumorigenesis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2006, 31, 164–1

Chunk 38:
e expression of Hsp25 and Hsp72
differentially regulates tumor growth and metastasis. Tumour Biol. 2004, 25, 243–251.
19. Nagaraja, G.N.; Kaur, P.; Asea, A. Role of human and mouse HspB1 in metastasis.
Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1142–1150.
20. Calderwood, S.K.; Khaleque, M.A.; Sawyer, D.B.; Ciocca, D.R. Heat shock proteins in cancer:
Chaperones of tumorigenesis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2006, 31, 164–172.
21. Arrigo, A.P.; Gibert, B. HspB1 dynamic phospho-oligomeric structure dependent interactome as
cancer therapeutic target. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1151–1163.
22. Arrigo, A.; Simon, S. Dual, Beneficial and Deleterous, Roles of Small Stress Proteins in Human
Diseases: Implications for Therapeutic Strategies. In Small Stress Proteins in Human Diseases;
Book Serie: Protein Science Engineering; Arrigo, A.P., Simon, S., Eds.; Nova Sciences:
New York, NY, USA, 2010; pp. 457–476.
23. Gibert, B.; Eckel, B.; Fasquelle, L.; Moulin, M.; Bouhallier, F.; Gonin, V.; Mellier, G.; Simon, S.;
Kretz-Remy, C.; Arrigo, A.P.; et al. Knock down of heat shock protein 27 (HspB1) induces
degradation of several putative client proteins. PLoS One 2012, 7, e29719.
24. Arrigo, A.P.; Gibert, B. Protein interactomes of three stress inducible small heat shock proteins:
HspB1, HspB5 and HspB8. Int. J. Hyperth. 2013, 29, 409–422.
25. Arrigo, A.P. Human small heat shock proteins: Protein interactomes of homo- and hetero-oligomeric
complexes: An update. FEBS Lett. 2013, 587, 1959–1969.
26. Ciocca, D.R.; Calderwood, S.K. Heat shock proteins in cancer: Diagnostic, prognostic,
predictive, and treatment implications. Cell Stress Chaperones 2005, 10, 86–103.
27. Arrigo, A.P. Pathology-dependent effects linked to small heat shock proteins expression.
Scientifica 2012, 2012, 19.
28. Blackburn, R.V.; Galoforo, S.S.; Berns, C.M.; Armour, E.P.; McEachern, D.; Corry, P.M.;
Lee, Y.J. Comparison of tumor growth between Hsp25- and Hsp27- transfected murine L929
cells in nude mice. Int. J. Cancer 1997, 72, 871–877.
29

Chunk 39:
s. Cell Stress Chaperones 2005, 10, 86–103.
27. Arrigo, A.P. Pathology-dependent effects linked to small heat shock proteins expression.
Scientifica 2012, 2012, 19.
28. Blackburn, R.V.; Galoforo, S.S.; Berns, C.M.; Armour, E.P.; McEachern, D.; Corry, P.M.;
Lee, Y.J. Comparison of tumor growth between Hsp25- and Hsp27- transfected murine L929
cells in nude mice. Int. J. Cancer 1997, 72, 871–877.
29. Katoh, M.; Koninkx, J.; Schumacher, U. Heat shock protein expression in human tumours grown
in severe combined immunodeficient mice. Cancer Lett. 2000, 161, 113–120.
30. Hsu, H.S.; Lin, J.H.; Huang, W.C.; Hsu, T.W.; Su, K.; Chiou, S.H.; Tsai, Y.T.; Hung, S.C.
Chemoresistance of lung cancer stemlike cells depends on activation of Hsp27. Cancer 2011,
117, 1516–1528.
31. Wei, L.; Liu, T.T.; Wang, H.H.; Hong, H.M.; Yu, A.L.; Feng, H.P.; Chang, W.W.
Hsp27 participates in the maintenance of breast cancer stem cells through regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and nuclear factor-kappaB. Breast Cancer Res. 2011, 13, R101.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 351
32. Straume, O.; Shimamura, T.; Lampa, M.J.; Carretero, J.; Oyan, A.M.; Jia, D.; Borgman, C.L.;
Soucheray, M.; Downing, S.R.; Short, S.M.; et al. Suppression of heat shock protein 27 induces
long-term dormancy in human breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 8699–8704.
33. Wettstein, G.; Bellaye, P.S.; Kolb, M.; Hammann, A.; Crestani, B.; Soler, P.; Marchal-Somme, J.;
Hazoume, A.; Gauldie, J.; Gunther, A.; et al. Inhibition of HSP27 blocks fibrosis development
and EMT features by promoting Snail degradation. FASEB J. 2013, 27, 4169–4183.
34. Castro, G.N.; Cayado-Gutierrez, N.; Moncalero, V.L.; Lima, P.; de Angelis, R.L.; Chavez, V.;
Cuello-Carrion, F.D.; Ciocca, D.R. Hsp27 (HSPB1): A possible surrogate molecular marker for
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 1p in oligodendrogliomas but not in astrocytomas.
Cell Stress Chaperones 2012, 17, 779–790.
35. Huot, J.; Roy, G.; Lambert, H.; Chretien,

Chunk 40:
 FASEB J. 2013, 27, 4169–4183.
34. Castro, G.N.; Cayado-Gutierrez, N.; Moncalero, V.L.; Lima, P.; de Angelis, R.L.; Chavez, V.;
Cuello-Carrion, F.D.; Ciocca, D.R. Hsp27 (HSPB1): A possible surrogate molecular marker for
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 1p in oligodendrogliomas but not in astrocytomas.
Cell Stress Chaperones 2012, 17, 779–790.
35. Huot, J.; Roy, G.; Lambert, H.; Chretien, P.; Landry, J. Increased survival after treatments with
anticancer agents of Chinese hamster cells expressing the human Mr 27,000 heat shock protein.
Cancer Res. 1991, 51, 5245–5252.
36. Richards, E.H.; Hickey, E.; Weber, L.A.; Master, J.R. Effect of overexpression of the small heat
shock protein HSP27 on the heat and drug sensitivities of human testis tumor cells. Cancer Res.
1996, 56, 2446–2451.
37. Arrigo, A.P. sHsp as novel regulators of programmed cell death and tumorigenicity. Pathol. Biol.
Paris 2000, 48, 280–288.
38. Garrido, C.; Gurbuxani, S.; Ravagnan, L.; Kroemer, G. Heat shock proteins: Endogenous
modulators of apoptotic cell death. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2001, 286, 433–442.
39. Kamada, M.; So, A.; Muramaki, M.; Rocchi, P.; Beraldi, E.; Gleave, M. Hsp27 knockdown
using nucleotide-based therapies inhibit tumor growth and enhance chemotherapy in human
bladder cancer cells. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2007, 6, 299–308.
40. Kang, S.H.; Kang, K.W.; Kim, K.H.; Kwon, B.; Kim, S.K.; Lee, H.Y.; Kong, S.Y.; Lee, E.S.;
Jang, S.G.; Yoo, B.C. Upregulated HSP27 in human breast cancer cells reduces Herceptin
susceptibility by increasing Her2 protein stability. BMC Cancer 2008, 8, 286.
41. Kase, S.; Parikh, J.G.; Rao, N.A. Expression of heat shock protein 27 and alpha-crystallins in
human retinoblastoma after chemoreduction. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 93, 541–544.
42. Zhang, Y.; Shen, X. Heat shock protein 27 protects L929 cells from cisplatin-induced apoptosis
by enhancing Akt activation and abating suppression of thioredoxin reductase activity.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2007, 13, 2855–2

Chunk 41:
41. Kase, S.; Parikh, J.G.; Rao, N.A. Expression of heat shock protein 27 and alpha-crystallins in
human retinoblastoma after chemoreduction. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 93, 541–544.
42. Zhang, Y.; Shen, X. Heat shock protein 27 protects L929 cells from cisplatin-induced apoptosis
by enhancing Akt activation and abating suppression of thioredoxin reductase activity.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2007, 13, 2855–2864.
43. Chen, R.; Dai, R.Y.; Duan, C.Y.; Liu, Y.P.; Chen, S.K.; Yan, D.M.; Chen, C.N.; Wei, M.; Li, H.
Unfolded protein response suppresses cisplatin-induced apoptosis via autophagy regulation in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Folia Biol. Praha 2011, 57, 87–95.
44. Fujita, R.; Ounzain, S.; Wang, A.C.; Heads, R.J.; Budhram-Mahadeo, V.S. Hsp-27 induction
requires POU4F2/Brn-3b TF in doxorubicin-treated breast cancer cells, whereas phosphorylation
alters its cellular localisation following drug treatment. Cell Stress Chaperones 2011, 16,
427–439.
45. Ounzain, S.; Bowen, S.; Patel, C.; Fujita, R.; Heads, R.J.; Budhram-Mahadeo, V.S.
Proliferation-associated POU4F2/Brn-3b transcription factor expression is regulated by oestrogen
through ERalpha and growth factors via MAPK pathway. Breast Cancer Res. 2011, 13, R5.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 352
46. Oesterreich, S.; Schunck, H.; Benndorf, R.; Bielka, H. Cisplatin induces the small heat shock
protein hsp25 and thermotolerance in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
1991, 180, 243–248.
47. Schafer, C.; Seeliger, H.; Bader, D.C.; Assmann, G.; Buchner, D.; Guo, Y.; Ziesch, A.; Palagyi, A.;
Ochs, S.; Laubender, R.P.; et al. Heat shock protein 27 as a prognostic and predictive biomarker
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2012, 16, 1776–1791.
48. Mori-Iwamoto, S.; Kuramitsu, Y.; Ryozawa, S.; Mikuria, K.; Fujimoto, M.; Maehara, S.;
Maehara, Y.; Okita, K.; Nakamura, K.; Sakaida, I. Proteomics finding heat shock protein 27
as a biomarker for resistance of pancreatic cancer cells to g

Chunk 42:
nder, R.P.; et al. Heat shock protein 27 as a prognostic and predictive biomarker
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2012, 16, 1776–1791.
48. Mori-Iwamoto, S.; Kuramitsu, Y.; Ryozawa, S.; Mikuria, K.; Fujimoto, M.; Maehara, S.;
Maehara, Y.; Okita, K.; Nakamura, K.; Sakaida, I. Proteomics finding heat shock protein 27
as a biomarker for resistance of pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine. Int. J. Oncol. 2007, 31,
1345–1350.
49. Nakashima, M.; Adachi, S.; Yasuda, I.; Yamauchi, T.; Kawaguchi, J.; Itani, M.; Yoshioka, T.;
Matsushima-Nishiwaki, R.; Hirose, Y.; Kozawa, O.; et al. Phosphorylation status of heat
shock protein 27 plays a key role in gemcitabine-induced apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.
Cancer Lett. 2011, 313, 218–225.
50. Zhang, D.; Wong, L.L.; Koay, E.S. Phosphorylation of Ser78 of Hsp27 correlated with
HER-2/neu status and lymph node positivity in breast cancer. Mol. Cancer 2007, 6, 52.
51. Paul, C.; Simon, S.; Gibert, B.; Virot, S.; Manero, F.; Arrigo, A.P. Dynamic processes that
reflect anti-apoptotic strategies set up by HspB1 (Hsp27). Exp. Cell Res. 2010, 316, 1535–1552.
52. Tweedle, E.M.; Khattak, I.; Ang, C.W.; Nedjadi, T.; Jenkins, R.; Park, B.K.; Kalirai, H.;
Dodson, A.; Azadeh, B.; Terlizzo, M.; et al. Low molecular weight heat shock protein HSP27 is
a prognostic indicator in rectal cancer but not colon cancer. Gut 2010, 59, 1501–1510.
53. Moyano, J.V.; Evans, J.R.; Chen, F.; Lu, M.; Werner, M.E.; Yehiely, F.; Diaz, L.K.; Turbin, D.;
Karaca, G.; Wiley, E.; et al. AlphaB-crystallin is a novel oncoprotein that predicts poor clinical
outcome in breast cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 2006, 116, 261–270.
54. Chen, P.; Ji, W.; Liu, F.Y.; Tang, H.Z.; Fu, S.; Zhang, X.; Liu, M.; Gong, L.; Deng, M.;
Hu, W.F.; et al. Alpha-crystallins and tumorigenesis. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1164–1173.
55. Chelouche-Lev, D.; Kluger, H.M.; Berger, A.J.; Rimm, D.L.; Price, J.E. alphaB-crystallin as a
marker of lymph node involvement in breast carcinoma. 

Chunk 43:

outcome in breast cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 2006, 116, 261–270.
54. Chen, P.; Ji, W.; Liu, F.Y.; Tang, H.Z.; Fu, S.; Zhang, X.; Liu, M.; Gong, L.; Deng, M.;
Hu, W.F.; et al. Alpha-crystallins and tumorigenesis. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1164–1173.
55. Chelouche-Lev, D.; Kluger, H.M.; Berger, A.J.; Rimm, D.L.; Price, J.E. alphaB-crystallin as a
marker of lymph node involvement in breast carcinoma. Cancer 2004, 100, 2543–2548.
56. Kim, H.S.; Lee, Y.; Lim, Y.A.; Kang, H.J.; Kim, L.S. AlphaB-crystallin is a novel oncoprotein
associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. J. Breast Cancer 2011, 14, 14–19.
57. Sitterding, S.M.; Wiseman, W.R.; Schiller, C.L.; Luan, C.; Chen, F.; Moyano, J.V.; Watkin, W.G.;
Wiley, E.L.; Cryns, V.L.; Diaz, L.K. AlphaB-crystallin: A novel marker of invasive basal-like
and metaplastic breast carcinomas. Ann. Diagn. Pathol. 2008, 12, 33–40.
58. Ivanov, O.; Chen, F.; Wiley, E.L.; Keswani, A.; Diaz, L.K.; Memmel, H.C.; Rademaker, A.;
Gradishar, W.J.; Morrow, M.; Khan, S.A.; et al. alphaB-crystallin is a novel predictor of resistance
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 2008, 111, 411–417.
59. Aoyama, A.; Steiger, R.; Frohli, E.; Schafer, R.; von Deimling, A.; Wiestler, O.; Klemenz, R.
Expression of alpha B-crystallin in human brain tumors. Int. J. Cancer 1993, 55, 760–764.
60. Khalil, A.A. Biomarker discovery: A proteomic approach for brain cancer profiling. Cancer Sci.
2007, 98, 201–213.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 353
61. Tang, Q.; Liu, Y.F.; Zhu, X.J.; Li, Y.H.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, J.P.; Feng, Z.Q.; Guan, X.H. Expression
and prognostic significance of the alpha B-crystallin gene in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hum. Pathol. 2009, 40, 300–305.
62. Liu, X.L.; Guo, K.P.; Ma, F.; Xie, G.Y.; He, Y.; Hu, C.H. Expression profile of heat shock
proteins in tissues and cells of lung adenocarcinoma. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban
2007, 32, 660–664.
63. Takashi, M.; Katsuno, S.; Sakata, T.; Ohshima, S.; Kato,

Chunk 44:
xpression
and prognostic significance of the alpha B-crystallin gene in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hum. Pathol. 2009, 40, 300–305.
62. Liu, X.L.; Guo, K.P.; Ma, F.; Xie, G.Y.; He, Y.; Hu, C.H. Expression profile of heat shock
proteins in tissues and cells of lung adenocarcinoma. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban
2007, 32, 660–664.
63. Takashi, M.; Katsuno, S.; Sakata, T.; Ohshima, S.; Kato, K. Different concentrations of two
small stress proteins, alphaB crystallin and HSP27 in human urological tumor tissues. Urol. Res.
1998, 26, 395–399.
64. Bai, F.; Xi, J.H.; Wawrousek, E.F.; Fleming, T.P.; Andley, U.P. Hyperproliferation and p53
status of lens epithelial cells derived from alphaB-crystallin knockout mice. J. Biol. Chem. 2003,
278, 36876–36886.
65. Shi, T.; Dong, F.; Liou, L.S.; Duan, Z.H.; Novick, A.C.; DiDonato, J.A. Differential protein
profiling in renal-cell carcinoma. Mol. Carcinog. 2004, 40, 47–61.
66. Mineva, I.; Gartner, W.; Hauser, P.; Kainz, A.; Loffler, M.; Wolf, G.; Oberbauer, R.; Weissel, M.;
Wagner, L. Differential expression of alphaB-crystallin and Hsp27–1 in anaplastic thyroid
carcinomas because of tumor-specific alphaB-crystallin gene (CRYAB) silencing. Cell Stress
Chaperones 2005, 10, 171–184.
67. Lung, H.L.; Lo, C.C.; Wong, C.C.; Cheung, A.K.; Cheong, K.F.; Wong, N.; Kwong, F.M.;
Chan, K.C.; Law, E.W.; Tsao, S.W.; et al. Identification of tumor suppressive activity by
irradiation microcell-mediated chromosome transfer and involvement of alpha B-crystallin in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 2008, 122, 1288–1296.
68. Solares, C.A.; Boyle, G.M.; Brown, I.; Parsons, P.G.; Panizza, B. Reduced alphaB-crystallin
staining in perineural invasion of head and neck cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Otolaryngol.
Head. Neck. Surg. 2010, 142, S15–S19.
69. Chen, J.; He, Q.Y.; Yuen, A.P.; Chiu, J.F. Proteomics of buccal squamous cell carcinoma: The
involvement of multiple pathways in tumorigenesis. Proteomics 2004, 4, 2465–2475.
70. He, Q.Y.; 

Chunk 45:
, G.M.; Brown, I.; Parsons, P.G.; Panizza, B. Reduced alphaB-crystallin
staining in perineural invasion of head and neck cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Otolaryngol.
Head. Neck. Surg. 2010, 142, S15–S19.
69. Chen, J.; He, Q.Y.; Yuen, A.P.; Chiu, J.F. Proteomics of buccal squamous cell carcinoma: The
involvement of multiple pathways in tumorigenesis. Proteomics 2004, 4, 2465–2475.
70. He, Q.Y.; Chen, J.; Kung, H.F.; Yuen, A.P.; Chiu, J.F. Identification of tumor-associated
proteins in oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma by proteomics. Proteomics 2004, 4, 271–278.
71. Stronach, E.A.; Sellar, G.C.; Blenkiron, C.; Rabiasz, G.J.; Taylor, K.J.; Miller, E.P.; Massie, C.E.;
Al-Nafussi, A.; Smyth, J.F.; Porteous, D.J.; et al. Identification of clinically relevant genes on
chromosome 11 in a functional model of ovarian cancer tumor suppression. Cancer Res. 2003,
63, 8648–8655.
72. Bosman, J.D.; Yehiely, F.; Evans, J.R.; Cryns, V.L. Regulation of alphaB-crystallin gene
expression by the transcription factor Ets1 in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010, 119,
63–70.
73. Deng, M.; Chen, P.C.; Xie, S.; Zhao, J.; Gong, L.; Liu, J.; Zhang, L.; Sun, S.; Liu, J.; Ma, H.;
et al. The small heat shock protein alphaA-crystallin is expressed in pancreas and acts as a
negative regulator of carcinogenesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2010, 1802, 621–631.
74. Mahon, K.A.; Chepelinsky, A.B.; Khillan, J.S.; Overbeek, P.A.; Piatigorsky, J.; Westphal, H.
Oncogenesis of the lens in transgenic mice. Science 1987, 235, 1622–1628.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 354
75. Rigas, P.K.; Kase, S.; Rao, N.A. Expression of alpha-crystallins in human sebaceous carcinoma
of the eyelid. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 19, 702–707.
76. Basha, E.; O’Neill, H.; Vierling, E. Small heat shock proteins and alpha-crystallins: Dynamic
proteins with flexible functions. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2011, 37, 106–117.
77. Arrigo, A.P. Structure-functions of HspB1 (Hsp27). Methods Mol. Biol. 2011, 787, 105–119.
78. Simon, S.; D

Chunk 46:
A. Expression of alpha-crystallins in human sebaceous carcinoma
of the eyelid. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 19, 702–707.
76. Basha, E.; O’Neill, H.; Vierling, E. Small heat shock proteins and alpha-crystallins: Dynamic
proteins with flexible functions. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2011, 37, 106–117.
77. Arrigo, A.P. Structure-functions of HspB1 (Hsp27). Methods Mol. Biol. 2011, 787, 105–119.
78. Simon, S.; Dimitrova, V.; Gibert, B.; Virot, S.; Mounier, N.; Nivon, M.; Kretz-Remy, C.;
Corset, V.; Mehlen, P.; Arrigo, A.P. Analysis of the dominant effects mediated by wild type or
R120G mutant of alphaB-crystallin (HspB5) towards Hsp27 (HspB1). PLoS One 2013, 8, e70545.
79. Arrigo, A.-P.; Suhan, J.P.; Welch, W.J. Dynamic changes in the structure and intracellular locale of
the mammalian low-molecular-weight heat shock protein. Mol. Cell. Biol. 1988, 8, 5059–5071.
80. Mehlen, P.; Arrigo, A.-P. The serum-induced phosphorylation of mammalian hsp27 correlates
with changes in its intracellular localization and levels of oligomerization. Eur. J. Biochem.
1994, 221, 327–334.
81. Mehlen, P.; Hickey, E.; Weber, L.; Arrigo, A.-P. Large unphosphorylated aggregates as the
active form of hsp27 which controls intracellular reactive oxygen species and glutathione levels
and generates a protection against TNFα in NIH-3T3-ras cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.
1997, 241, 187–192.
82. Garrido, C. Size matters: Of the small HSP27 and its large oligomers. Cell Death Differ. 2002, 9,
483–485.
83. Arrigo, A.P. The cellular ―networking‖ of mammalian Hsp27 and its functions in the control of
protein folding, redox state and apoptosis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2007, 594, 14–26.
84. Stengel, F.; Baldwin, A.J.; Painter, A.J.; Jaya, N.; Basha, E.; Kay, L.E.; Vierling, E.;
Robinson, C.V.; Benesch, J.L. Quaternary dynamics and plasticity underlie small heat shock
protein chaperone function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 2007–2012.
85. Ciocca, D.R.; Luque, E.H. Immunological evidence for the identity betwee

Chunk 47:
ox state and apoptosis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2007, 594, 14–26.
84. Stengel, F.; Baldwin, A.J.; Painter, A.J.; Jaya, N.; Basha, E.; Kay, L.E.; Vierling, E.;
Robinson, C.V.; Benesch, J.L. Quaternary dynamics and plasticity underlie small heat shock
protein chaperone function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 2007–2012.
85. Ciocca, D.R.; Luque, E.H. Immunological evidence for the identity between the hsp27
estrogen- regulated heat shock protein and the p29 estrogen receptor-associated protein in breast
and endometrial cancer. Breast. Cancer Res. Treat. 1991, 20, 33–42.
86. Al-Madhoun, A.S.; Chen, Y.X.; Haidari, L.; Rayner, K.; Gerthoffer, W.; McBride, H.;
O’Brien, E.R. The interaction and cellular localization of HSP27 and ERbeta are modulated by
17beta-estradiol and HSP27 phosphorylation. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 2007, 270, 33–42.
87. Kerr, B.A.; Byzova, T.V. alphaB-crystallin: A novel VEGF chaperone. Blood 2010, 115,
3181–3183.
88. Ghosh, J.G.; Shenoy, A.K., Jr.; Clark, J.I. Interactions between important regulatory proteins and
human alphaB crystallin. Biochemistry 2007, 46, 6308–6317.
89. Zoubeidi, A.; Zardan, A.; Beraldi, E.; Fazli, L.; Sowery, R.; Rennie, P.; Nelson, C.; Gleave, M.
Cooperative interactions between androgen receptor (AR) and heat-shock protein 27 facilitate
AR transcriptional activity. Cancer Res. 2007, 67, 10455–10465.
90. Adhikari, A.S.; Singh, B.N.; Rao, K.S.; Rao Ch, M. alphaB-crystallin, a small heat shock protein,
modulates NF-kappaB activity in a phosphorylation-dependent manner and protects muscle
myoblasts from TNF-alpha induced cytotoxicity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2011, 1813, 1532–1542.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 355
91. Wu, Y.; Liu, J.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, H.; Shen, J.; Zhang, S.; Jiang, Y.; Luo, L.; Yin, Z. HSP27
regulates IL-1 stimulated IKK activation through interacting with TRAF6 and affecting its
ubiquitination. Cell. Signal. 2009, 21, 143–150.
92. Charette, S.J.; Landry, J. The interaction of HSP27 with Daxx identifies a 

Chunk 48:
iochim. Biophys. Acta 2011, 1813, 1532–1542.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 355
91. Wu, Y.; Liu, J.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, H.; Shen, J.; Zhang, S.; Jiang, Y.; Luo, L.; Yin, Z. HSP27
regulates IL-1 stimulated IKK activation through interacting with TRAF6 and affecting its
ubiquitination. Cell. Signal. 2009, 21, 143–150.
92. Charette, S.J.; Landry, J. The interaction of HSP27 with Daxx identifies a potential regulatory
role of HSP27 in Fas-induced apoptosis. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 2000, 926, 126–131.
93. Lee, H.J.; Lee, Y.S. Repeated-dose toxicity of HSP27-binding heptapeptide in mice. Drug Chem.
Toxicol. 2010, 33, 284–290.
94. Patil, S.B.; Pawar, M.D.; Bitar, K.N. Direct association and translocation of PKC-alpha with
calponin. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 2004, 286, G954–G963.
95. Wu, R.; Kausar, H.; Johnson, P.; Montoya-Durango, D.E.; Merchant, M.; Rane, M.J. Hsp27
regulates Akt activation and polymorphonuclear leukocyte apoptosis by scaffolding MK2 to Akt
signal complex. J. Biol. Chem. 2007, 282, 21598–21608.
96. Liu, J.P.; Schlosser, R.; Ma, W.Y.; Dong, Z.; Feng, H.; Lui, L.; Huang, X.Q.; Liu, Y.; Li, D.W.
Human alphaA- and alphaB-crystallins prevent UVA-induced apoptosis through regulation of
PKCalpha, RAF/MEK/ERK and AKT signaling pathways. Exp. Eye Res. 2004, 79, 393–403.
97. Chebotareva, N.A.; Makeeva, V.F.; Bazhina, S.G.; Eronina, T.B.; Gusev, N.B.; Kurganov, B.I.
Interaction of Hsp27 with native phosphorylase kinase under crowding conditions. Macromol.
Biosci. 2010, 10, 783–789.
98. Zoubeidi, A.; Zardan, A.; Wiedmann, R.M.; Locke, J.; Beraldi, E.; Fazli, L.; Gleave, M.E. Hsp27
promotes insulin-like growth factor-I survival signaling in prostate cancer via p90Rsk-dependent
phosphorylation and inactivation of BAD. Cancer Res. 2010, 70, 2307–2317.
99. Cayado-Gutierrez, N.; Moncalero, V.L.; Rosales, E.M.; Beron, W.; Salvatierra, E.E.;
Alvarez-Olmedo, D.; Radrizzani, M.; Ciocca, D.R. Downregulation of Hsp27 (HSPB1) in
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells 

Chunk 49:
, L.; Gleave, M.E. Hsp27
promotes insulin-like growth factor-I survival signaling in prostate cancer via p90Rsk-dependent
phosphorylation and inactivation of BAD. Cancer Res. 2010, 70, 2307–2317.
99. Cayado-Gutierrez, N.; Moncalero, V.L.; Rosales, E.M.; Beron, W.; Salvatierra, E.E.;
Alvarez-Olmedo, D.; Radrizzani, M.; Ciocca, D.R. Downregulation of Hsp27 (HSPB1) in
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells induces upregulation of PTEN. Cell Stress Chaperones 2012,
18, 243–249.
100. Doppler, H.; Storz, P.; Li, J.; Comb, M.J.; Toker, A. A phosphorylation state-specific antibody
recognizes Hsp27, a novel substrate of protein kinase D. J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280, 15013–15019.
101. Wang, J.; Huo, K.; Ma, L.; Tang, L.; Li, D.; Huang, X.; Yuan, Y.; Li, C.; Wang, W.; Guan, W.; et al.
Toward an understanding of the protein interaction network of the human liver. Mol. Syst. Biol.
2011, 7, 536.
102. Li, D.W.; Liu, J.P.; Mao, Y.W.; Xiang, H.; Wang, J.; Ma, W.Y.; Dong, Z.; Pike, H.M.;
Brown, R.E.; Reed, J.C. Calcium-activated RAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathway mediates
p53-dependent apoptosis and is abrogated by alpha B-crystallin through inhibition of RAS
activation. Mol. Biol. Cell. 2005, 16, 4437–4453.
103. Dall’Era, M.A.; Oudes, A.; Martin, D.B.; Liu, A.Y. HSP27 and HSP70 interact with CD10 in
C4–2 prostate cancer cells. Prostate 2007, 67, 714–721.
104. Van Noort, J.M.; Bsibsi, M.; Nacken, P.J.; Gerritsen, W.H.; Amor, S.; Holtman, I.R.; Boddeke, E.;
van Ark, I.; Leusink-Muis, T.; Folkerts, G.; et al. Activation of an immune-regulatory macrophage
response and inhibition of lung inflammation in a mouse model of COPD using heat-shock
protein alpha B-crystallin-loaded PLGA microparticles. Biomaterials 2013, 34, 831–840.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 356
105. Thuringer, D.; Jego, G.; Wettstein, G.; Terrier, O.; Cronier, L.; Yousfi, N.; Hebrard, S.; Bouchot, A.;
Hazoume, A.; Joly, A.L.; et al. Extracellular HSP27 mediates angiogenesis through Toll-like
receptor 3. FASEB J. 2013, 27, 4169–4183

Chunk 50:
e model of COPD using heat-shock
protein alpha B-crystallin-loaded PLGA microparticles. Biomaterials 2013, 34, 831–840.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 356
105. Thuringer, D.; Jego, G.; Wettstein, G.; Terrier, O.; Cronier, L.; Yousfi, N.; Hebrard, S.; Bouchot, A.;
Hazoume, A.; Joly, A.L.; et al. Extracellular HSP27 mediates angiogenesis through Toll-like
receptor 3. FASEB J. 2013, 27, 4169–4183.
106. Pandey, P.; Farber, R.; Nakazawa, A.; Kumar, S.; Bharti, A.; Nalin, C.; Weichselbaum, R.; Kufe, D.;
Kharbanda, S. Hsp27 functions as a negative regulator of cytochrome c-dependent activation of
procaspase-3. Oncogene 2000, 19, 1975–1981.
107. Hu, W.F.; Gong, L.; Cao, Z.; Ma, H.; Ji, W.; Deng, M.; Liu, M.; Hu, X.H.; Chen, P.; Yan, Q.; et al.
alphaA- and alphaB-crystallins interact with caspase-3 and Bax to guard mouse lens
development. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 177–187.
108. Bruey, J.M.; Ducasse, C.; Bonniaud, P.; Ravagnan, L.; Susin, S.A.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Gurbuxani, S.;
Arrigo, A.P.; Kroemer, G.; Solary, E.; et al. Hsp27 negatively regulates cell death by interacting
with cytochrome c. Nat. Cell. Biol. 2000, 2, 645–652.
109. Padival, A.K.; Crabb, J.W.; Nagaraj, R.H. Methylglyoxal modifies heat shock protein 27 in
glomerular mesangial cells. FEBS Lett. 2003, 551, 113–118.
110. Mao, Y.W.; Liu, J.P.; Xiang, H.; Li, D.W. Human alphaA- and alphaB-crystallins bind to Bax
and Bcl-X(S) to sequester their translocation during staurosporine-induced apoptosis. Cell Death
Differ. 2004, 11, 512–526.
111. Liu, S.; Li, J.; Tao, Y.; Xiao, X. Small heat shock protein alphaB-crystallin binds to p53 to
sequester its translocation to mitochondria during hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2007, 354, 109–114.
112. Beresford, P.J.; Jaju, M.; Friedman, R.S.; Yoon, M.J.; Lieberman, J. A role for heat shock
protein 27 in CTL-mediated cell death. J. Immunol. 1998, 161, 161–167.
113. Lee, J.S.; Kim, H.Y.; Jeong, N.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Yoon, Y.G.; Choi, Y.H.; Yan, C.;

Chunk 51:
 to p53 to
sequester its translocation to mitochondria during hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2007, 354, 109–114.
112. Beresford, P.J.; Jaju, M.; Friedman, R.S.; Yoon, M.J.; Lieberman, J. A role for heat shock
protein 27 in CTL-mediated cell death. J. Immunol. 1998, 161, 161–167.
113. Lee, J.S.; Kim, H.Y.; Jeong, N.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Yoon, Y.G.; Choi, Y.H.; Yan, C.; Chu, I.S.; Koh, H.;
Park, H.T.; et al. Expression of alphaB-crystallin overrides the anti-apoptotic activity of XIAP.
Neuro. Oncol. 2012, 14, 1332–1345.
114. Arany, I.; Clark, J.S.; Reed, D.K.; Ember, I.; Juncos, L.A. Cisplatin enhances interaction between
p66Shc and HSP27: Its role in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in renal proximal tubule
cells. Anticancer Res. 2012, 32, 4759–4763.
115. Preville, X.; Salvemini, F.; Giraud, S.; Chaufour, S.; Paul, C.; Stepien, G.; Ursini, M.V.; Arrigo, A.P.
Mammalian small stress proteins protect against oxidative stress through their ability to increase
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity and by maintaining optimal cellular detoxifying
machinery. Exp. Cell Res. 1999, 247, 61–78.
116. Cosentino, C.; Grieco, D.; Costanzo, V. ATM activates the pentose phosphate pathway promoting
anti-oxidant defence and DNA repair. EMBO J. 2011, 30, 546–555.
117. Perng, M.D.; Cairns, L.; van den, I.P.; Prescott, A.; Hutcheson, A.M.; Quinlan, R.A. Intermediate
filament interactions can be altered by HSP27 and alphaB-crystallin. J. Cell Sci. 1999, 112,
2099–2112.
118. Mounier, N.; Arrigo, A.P. Actin cytoskeleton and small heat shock proteins: How do they
interact? Cell Stress Chaperones 2002, 7, 167–176.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 357
119. Ke, L.; Meijering, R.A.; Hoogstra-Berends, F.; Mackovicova, K.; Vos, M.J.; van Gelder, I.C.;
Henning, R.H.; Kampinga, H.H.; Brundel, B.J. HSPB1, HSPB6, HSPB7 and HSPB8 protect
against RhoA GTPase-induced remodeling in tachypaced atrial myocytes. PLoS One 2011, 6,
e20395.
120. Seit-Nebi, A.S.; Datske

Chunk 52:
they
interact? Cell Stress Chaperones 2002, 7, 167–176.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 357
119. Ke, L.; Meijering, R.A.; Hoogstra-Berends, F.; Mackovicova, K.; Vos, M.J.; van Gelder, I.C.;
Henning, R.H.; Kampinga, H.H.; Brundel, B.J. HSPB1, HSPB6, HSPB7 and HSPB8 protect
against RhoA GTPase-induced remodeling in tachypaced atrial myocytes. PLoS One 2011, 6,
e20395.
120. Seit-Nebi, A.S.; Datskevich, P.; Gusev, N.B. Commentary on paper: Small heat shock proteins
and the cytoskeleton: An essential interplay for cell integrity? (Wettstein et al.). Int. J. Biochem.
Cell Biol. 2013, 45, 344–346.
121. Del Vecchio, P.J.; MacElroy, K.S.; Rosser, M.P.; Church, R.L. Association of alpha-crystallin
with actin in cultured lens cells. Curr. Eye Res. 1984, 3, 1213–1219.
122. Wang, K.; Spector, A. alpha-Crystallin stabilizes actin filaments and prevents cytochalasin- induced
depolymerization in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Eur. J. Biochem. 1996, 242, 56–66.
123. Singh, B.N.; Rao, K.S.; Ramakrishna, T.; Rangaraj, N.; Rao Ch, M. Association of
alphab-crystallin, a small heat shock protein, with actin: Role in modulating actin filament
dynamics in vivo. J. Mol. Biol. 2007, 366, 756–767.
124. Ghosh, J.G.; Houck, S.A.; Clark, J.I. Interactive sequences in the stress protein and molecular
chaperone human alphaB crystallin recognize and modulate the assembly of filaments. Int. J.
Biochem. Cell Biol. 2007, 39, 1804–1815.
125. Hino, M.; Kurogi, K.; Okubo, M.A.; Murata-Hori, M.; Hosoya, H. Small heat shock protein 27
(HSP27) associates with tubulin/microtubules in HeLa cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
2000, 271, 164–169.
126. Ohto-Fujita, E.; Fujita, Y.; Atomi, Y. Analysis of the alphaB-crystallin domain responsible for
inhibiting tubulin aggregation. Cell Stress Chaperones 2007, 12, 163–171.
127. Ghosh, J.G.; Houck, S.A.; Clark, J.I. Interactive domains in the molecular chaperone human
alphaB crystallin modulate microtubule assembly and disassembly. PLoS One 2007, 2, e498.
1

Chunk 53:
phys. Res. Commun.
2000, 271, 164–169.
126. Ohto-Fujita, E.; Fujita, Y.; Atomi, Y. Analysis of the alphaB-crystallin domain responsible for
inhibiting tubulin aggregation. Cell Stress Chaperones 2007, 12, 163–171.
127. Ghosh, J.G.; Houck, S.A.; Clark, J.I. Interactive domains in the molecular chaperone human
alphaB crystallin modulate microtubule assembly and disassembly. PLoS One 2007, 2, e498.
128. Xi, J.H.; Bai, F.; McGaha, R.; Andley, U.P. Alpha-crystallin expression affects microtubule
assembly and prevents their aggregation. FASEB J. 2006, 20, 846–857.
129. Djabali, K.; de Nechaud, B.; Landon, F.; Portier, M.M. AlphaB-crystallin interacts with
intermediate filaments in response to stress. J. Cell Sci. 1997, 110, 2759–2769.
130. Djabali, K.; Piron, G.; de Nechaud, B.; Portier, M.M. alphaB-crystallin interacts with cytoplasmic
intermediate filament bundles during mitosis. Exp. Cell Res. 1999, 253, 649–662.
131. Fanelli, M.A.; Montt-Guevara, M.; Diblasi, A.M.; Gago, F.E.; Tello, O.; Cuello-Carrion, F.D.;
Callegari, E.; Bausero, M.A.; Ciocca, D.R. P-cadherin and beta-catenin are useful prognostic
markers in breast cancer patients; beta-catenin interacts with heat shock protein Hsp27. Cell
Stress Chaperones 2008, 13, 207–220.
132. Thedieck, C.; Kalbacher, H.; Kratzer, U.; Lammers, R.; Stevanovic, S.; Klein, G. alpha
B-crystallin is a cytoplasmic interaction partner of the kidney-specific cadherin-16. J. Mol. Biol.
2008, 378, 145–153.
133. Muchowski, P.J.; Valdez, M.M.; Clark, J.I. AlphaB-crystallin selectively targets intermediate
filament proteins during thermal stress. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 1999, 40, 951–958.
134. Barton, K.A.; Hsu, C.D.; Petrash, J.M. Interactions between small heat shock protein
alpha-crystallin and galectin-related interfiber protein (GRIFIN) in the ocular lens. Biochemistry
2009, 48, 3956–3966.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 358
135. Rocchi, P.; Beraldi, E.; Ettinger, S.; Fazli, L.; Vessella, R.L.; Nelson, C.; Gleave, M. Increased

Chunk 54:
nvest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 1999, 40, 951–958.
134. Barton, K.A.; Hsu, C.D.; Petrash, J.M. Interactions between small heat shock protein
alpha-crystallin and galectin-related interfiber protein (GRIFIN) in the ocular lens. Biochemistry
2009, 48, 3956–3966.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 358
135. Rocchi, P.; Beraldi, E.; Ettinger, S.; Fazli, L.; Vessella, R.L.; Nelson, C.; Gleave, M. Increased
Hsp27 after androgen ablation facilitates androgen-independent progression in prostate cancer
via signal transducers and activators of transcription 3-mediated suppression of apoptosis.
Cancer Res. 2005, 65, 11083–11093.
136. Brunet Simioni, M.; de Thonel, A.; Hammann, A.; Joly, A.L.; Bossis, G.; Fourmaux, E.;
Bouchot, A.; Landry, J.; Piechaczyk, M.; Garrido, C. Heat shock protein 27 is involved in
SUMO-2/3 modification of heat shock factor 1 and thereby modulates the transcription factor
activity. Oncogene 2009, 28, 3332–3344.
137. De Thonel, A.; Vandekerckhove, J.; Lanneau, D.; Selvakumar, S.; Courtois, G.; Hazoume, A.;
Brunet, M.; Maurel, S.; Hammann, A.; Ribeil, J.A.; et al. HSP27 controls GATA-1 protein level
during erythroid cell differentiation. Blood 2010, 116, 85–96.
138. Cuesta, R.; Laroia, G.; Schneider, R.J. Chaperone Hsp27 inhibits translation during heat shock
by binding eIF4G and facilitating dissociation of cap-initiation complexes. Genes Dev. 2000, 14,
1460–1470.
139. Andrieu, C.; Taieb, D.; Baylot, V.; Ettinger, S.; Soubeyran, P.; De-Thonel, A.; Nelson, C.;
Garrido, C.; So, A.; Fazli, L.; et al. Heat shock protein 27 confers resistance to androgen ablation
and chemotherapy in prostate cancer cells through eIF4E. Oncogene 2010, 29, 1883–1896.
140. Sinsimer, K.S.; Gratacos, F.M.; Knapinska, A.M.; Lu, J.; Krause, C.D.; Wierzbowski, A.V.;
Maher, L.R.; Scrudato, S.; Rivera, Y.M.; Gupta, S.; et al. Chaperone Hsp27, a novel subunit of
AUF1 protein complexes, functions in AU-rich element-mediated mRNA decay. Mol. Cell. Biol.
2008, 28, 5223–5237.
141. Knapinska, A

Chunk 55:
emotherapy in prostate cancer cells through eIF4E. Oncogene 2010, 29, 1883–1896.
140. Sinsimer, K.S.; Gratacos, F.M.; Knapinska, A.M.; Lu, J.; Krause, C.D.; Wierzbowski, A.V.;
Maher, L.R.; Scrudato, S.; Rivera, Y.M.; Gupta, S.; et al. Chaperone Hsp27, a novel subunit of
AUF1 protein complexes, functions in AU-rich element-mediated mRNA decay. Mol. Cell. Biol.
2008, 28, 5223–5237.
141. Knapinska, A.M.; Gratacos, F.M.; Krause, C.D.; Hernandez, K.; Jensen, A.G.; Bradley, J.J.;
Wu, X.; Pestka, S.; Brewer, G. Chaperone Hsp27 modulates AUF1 proteolysis and AU-rich
element-mediated mRNA degradation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2011, 31, 1419–1431.
142. Sun, Y.; Zhou, M.; Fu, D.; Xu, B.; Fang, T.; Ma, Y.; Chen, J.; Zhang, J. Ubiquitination of heat
shock protein 27 is mediated by its interaction with Smad ubiquitination regulatory factor 2 in
A549 cells. Exp. Lung Res. 2011, 37, 568–573.
143. Parcellier, A.; Brunet, M.; Schmitt, E.; Col, E.; Didelot, C.; Hammann, A.; Nakayama, K.;
Nakayama, K.I.; Khochbin, S.; Solary, E.; et al. HSP27 favors ubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation of p27Kip1 and helps S-phase re-entry in stressed cells. FASEB J. 2006, 20, 1179–1181.
144. Parcellier, A.; Schmitt, E.; Gurbuxani, S.; Seigneurin-Berny, D.; Pance, A.; Chantome, A.;
Plenchette, S.; Khochbin, S.; Solary, E.; Garrido, C. HSP27 is a ubiquitin-binding protein
involved in I-kappaBalpha proteasomal degradation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2003, 23, 5790–5802.
145. Lin, D.I.; Barbash, O.; Kumar, K.G.; Weber, J.D.; Harper, J.W.; Klein-Szanto, A.J.; Rustgi, A.;
Fuchs, S.Y.; Diehl, J.A. Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of cyclin D1 by the
SCF(FBX4-alphaB crystallin) complex. Mol. Cell. 2006, 24, 355–366.
146. Boelens, W.C.; Croes, Y.; de Jong, W.W. Interaction between alphaB-crystallin and the human
20S proteasomal subunit C8/alpha7. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2001, 1544, 311–319.
147. Mehlen, P.; Mehlen, A.; Godet, J.; Arrigo, A.-P. Hsp27 as a switch between differentiation and
apoptosis in murine embryo

Chunk 56:
uitination of cyclin D1 by the
SCF(FBX4-alphaB crystallin) complex. Mol. Cell. 2006, 24, 355–366.
146. Boelens, W.C.; Croes, Y.; de Jong, W.W. Interaction between alphaB-crystallin and the human
20S proteasomal subunit C8/alpha7. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2001, 1544, 311–319.
147. Mehlen, P.; Mehlen, A.; Godet, J.; Arrigo, A.-P. Hsp27 as a switch between differentiation and
apoptosis in murine embryonic stem cells. J. Biol. Chem. 1997, 272, 31657–31665.
148. Arrigo, A.P. Editorial: Heat shock proteins in cancer. Curr. Mol. Med. 2012, 12, 1099–1101.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 359
149. Paul, C.; Manero, F.; Gonin, S.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Virot, S.; Arrigo, A.P. Hsp27 as a negative
regulator of cytochrome C release. Mol. Cell Biol. 2002, 22, 816–834.
150. Chauhan, D.; Li, G.; Hideshima, T.; Podar, K.; Mitsiades, C.; Mitsiades, N.; Catley, L.; Tai, Y.T.;
Hayashi, T.; Shringarpure, R.; et al. Hsp27 inhibits release of mitochondrial protein Smac in
multiple myeloma cells and confers dexamethasone resistance. Blood 2003, 102, 3379–3386.
151. Garrido, C.; Bruey, J.M.; Fromentin, A.; Hammann, A.; Arrigo, A.P.; Solary, E. HSP27 inhibits
cytochrome c-dependent activation of procaspase-9. FASEB J. 1999, 13, 2061–2070.
152. Mehlen, P.; Préville, X.; Chareyron, P.; Briolay, J.; Klemenz, R.; Arrigo, A.-P. Constitutive
expression of human hsp27, Drosophila hsp27, or human alpha B-crystallin confers resistance to
TNF- and oxidative stress-induced cytotoxicity in stably transfected murine L929 fibroblasts.
J. Immunol. 1995, 154, 363–374.
153. Charette, S.J.; Lavoie, J.N.; Lambert, H.; Landry, J. Inhibition of daxx-mediated apoptosis by
heat shock protein 27. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2000, 20, 7602–7612.
154. Rane, M.J.; Pan, Y.; Singh, S.; Powell, D.W.; Wu, R.; Cummins, T.; Chen, Q.; McLeish, K.R.;
Klein, J.B. Heat shock protein 27 controls apoptosis by regulating Akt activation. J. Biol. Chem.
2003, 278, 27828–27835.
155. Golembieski, W.A.; Thomas, S.L.; Schultz, C.R.; Yunker, C.K.; McClun

Chunk 57:
y, J. Inhibition of daxx-mediated apoptosis by
heat shock protein 27. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2000, 20, 7602–7612.
154. Rane, M.J.; Pan, Y.; Singh, S.; Powell, D.W.; Wu, R.; Cummins, T.; Chen, Q.; McLeish, K.R.;
Klein, J.B. Heat shock protein 27 controls apoptosis by regulating Akt activation. J. Biol. Chem.
2003, 278, 27828–27835.
155. Golembieski, W.A.; Thomas, S.L.; Schultz, C.R.; Yunker, C.K.; McClung, H.M.; Lemke, N.;
Cazacu, S.; Barker, T.; Sage, E.H.; Brodie, C.; et al. HSP27 mediates SPARC-induced changes
in glioma morphology, migration, and invasion. Glia 2008, 56, 1061–1075.
156. McClung, H.M.; Golembieski, W.A.; Schultz, C.R.; Jankowski, M.; Schultz, L.R.; Rempel, S.A.
Deletion of the SPARC acidic domain or EGF-like module reduces SPARC-induced migration
and signaling through p38 MAPK/HSP27 in glioma. Carcinogenesis 2012, 33, 275–284.
157. Andley, U.P.; Song, Z.; Wawrousek, E.F.; Fleming, T.P.; Bassnett, S. Differential protective
activity of {alpha}A- and {alpha}B-crystallin in lens epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275,
36823–36831.
158. Launay, N.; Tarze, A.; Vicart, P.; Lilienbaum, A. Serine 59 phosphorylation of {alpha}B-crystallin
down-regulates its anti-apoptotic function by binding and sequestering Bcl-2 in breast cancer
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285, 37324–37332.
159. Lee, Y.S.; Lim, K.H.; Guo, X.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Gao, Y.; Barrientos, T.; Ordentlich, P.;
Wang, X.F.; Counter, C.M.; Yao, T.P. The cytoplasmic deacetylase HDAC6 is required for
efficient oncogenic tumorigenesis. Cancer Res. 2008, 68, 7561–7569.
160. Ghosh, A.; Lai, C.; McDonald, S.; Suraweera, N.; Sengupta, N.; Propper, D.; Dorudi, S.; Silver, A.
HSP27 expression in primary colorectal cancers is dependent on mutation of KRAS and
PI3K/AKT activation status and is independent of TP53. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 2013, 94, 103–108.
161. Yang, Y.; Ludwig, R.L.; Jensen, J.P.; Pierre, S.A.; Medaglia, M.V.; Davydov, I.V.; Safiran, Y.J.;
Oberoi, P.; Kenten, J.H.; Phillips, A.C.; et al. Small molecule in

Chunk 58:
 N.; Sengupta, N.; Propper, D.; Dorudi, S.; Silver, A.
HSP27 expression in primary colorectal cancers is dependent on mutation of KRAS and
PI3K/AKT activation status and is independent of TP53. Exp. Mol. Pathol. 2013, 94, 103–108.
161. Yang, Y.; Ludwig, R.L.; Jensen, J.P.; Pierre, S.A.; Medaglia, M.V.; Davydov, I.V.; Safiran, Y.J.;
Oberoi, P.; Kenten, J.H.; Phillips, A.C.; et al. Small molecule inhibitors of HDM2 ubiquitin
ligase activity stabilize and activate p53 in cells. Cancer Cell 2005, 7, 547–559.
162. Bausero, M.A.; Bharti, A.; Page, D.T.; Perez, K.D.; Eng, J.W.; Ordonez, S.L.; Asea, E.E.;
Jantschitsch, C.; Kindas-Muegge, I.; Ciocca, D.; et al. Silencing the hsp25 gene eliminates
migration capability of the highly metastatic murine 4T1 breast adenocarcinoma cell. Tumour
Biol. 2006, 27, 17–26.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 360
163. Ciocca, D.R.; Fanelli, M.A.; Cuello-Carrion, F.D.; Castro, G.N. Heat shock proteins in prostate
cancer: From tumorigenesis to the clinic. Int. J. Hyperth. 2010, 26, 737–747.
164. Lavoie, J.N.; Hickey, E.; Weber, L.A.; Landry, J. Modulation of actin microfilament dynamics
and fluid phase pinocytosis by phosphorylation of Heat Shock Protein 27. J. Biol. Chem. 1993,
268, 24210–24214.
165. Huot, J.; Houle, F.; Spitz, D.R.; Landry, J. HSP27 phosphorylation-mediated resistance against
actin fragmentation and cell death induced by oxidative stress. Cancer Res. 1996, 56, 273–279.
166. Dalle-Donne, I.; Rossi, R.; Milzani, A.; di Simplicio, P.; Colombo, R. The actin cytoskeleton
response to oxidants: From small heat shock protein phosphorylation to changes in the redox
state of actin itself. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2001, 31, 1624–1632.
167. Wettstein, G.; Bellaye, P.S.; Micheau, O.; Bonniaud, P. Small heat shock proteins and
the cytoskeleton: An essential interplay for cell integrity? Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2012, 44,
1680–1686.
168. Xu, L.; Chen, S.; Bergan, R.C. MAPKAPK2 and HSP27 are downstream effectors of p38 MAP
kinase-mediated

Chunk 59:
n to changes in the redox
state of actin itself. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2001, 31, 1624–1632.
167. Wettstein, G.; Bellaye, P.S.; Micheau, O.; Bonniaud, P. Small heat shock proteins and
the cytoskeleton: An essential interplay for cell integrity? Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2012, 44,
1680–1686.
168. Xu, L.; Chen, S.; Bergan, R.C. MAPKAPK2 and HSP27 are downstream effectors of p38 MAP
kinase-mediated matrix metalloproteinase type 2 activation and cell invasion in human prostate
cancer. Oncogene 2006, 25, 2987–2998.
169. Yoshimura, T.; Nagahara, M.; Kuo, C.; Turner, R.R.; Soon-Shiong, P.; Hoon, D.S. Lymphovascular
invasion of colorectal cancer is correlated to SPARC expression in the tumor stromal
microenvironment. Epigenetics 2011, 6, 1001–1011.
170. Schultz, C.R.; Golembieski, W.A.; King, D.A.; Brown, S.L.; Brodie, C.; Rempel, S.A. Inhibition
of HSP27 alone or in combination with pAKT inhibition as therapeutic approaches to target
SPARC-induced glioma cell survival. Mol. Cancer 2012, 11, 20.
171. Nagaraja, G.M.; Kaur, P.; Neumann, W.; Asea, E.E.; Bausero, M.A.; Multhoff, G.; Asea, A.
Silencing Hsp25/Hsp27 gene expression augments proteasome activity and increases CD8+
T-cell-mediated tumor killing and memory responses. Cancer Prev. Res. Phila 2012, 5,
122–137.
172. Gruvberger-Saal, S.K.; Parsons, R. Is the small heat shock protein alphaB-crystallin an
oncogene? J. Clin. Invest. 2006, 116, 30–32.
173. De Maio, A. Extracellular heat shock proteins, cellular export vesicles, and the Stress
Observation System: A form of communication during injury, infection, and cell damage. It is
never known how far a controversial finding will go! Dedicated to Ferruccio Ritossa. Cell Stress
Chaperones 2011, 16, 235–249.
174. Tsvetkova, N.M.; Horvath, I.; Torok, Z.; Wolkers, W.F.; Balogi, Z.; Shigapova, N.; Crowe, L.M.;
Tablin, F.; Vierling, E.; Crowe, J.H.; et al. Small heat-shock proteins regulate membrane lipid
polymorphism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002, 99, 13504–13509.
175. Chow

Chunk 60:
is
never known how far a controversial finding will go! Dedicated to Ferruccio Ritossa. Cell Stress
Chaperones 2011, 16, 235–249.
174. Tsvetkova, N.M.; Horvath, I.; Torok, Z.; Wolkers, W.F.; Balogi, Z.; Shigapova, N.; Crowe, L.M.;
Tablin, F.; Vierling, E.; Crowe, J.H.; et al. Small heat-shock proteins regulate membrane lipid
polymorphism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002, 99, 13504–13509.
175. Chowdary, T.K.; Bakthisaran, R.; Tangirala, R.; Rao, M.C. Interaction of mammalian Hsp22
with lipid membranes. Biochem. J. 2006, 401, 437–445.
176. Rayner, K.; Chen, Y.X.; McNulty, M.; Simard, T.; Zhao, X.; Wells, D.J.; de Belleroche, J.;
O’Brien, E.R. Extracellular release of the atheroprotective heat shock protein 27 is mediated by
estrogen and competitively inhibits acLDL binding to scavenger receptor-A. Circ. Res. 2008,
103, 133–141.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 361
177. Delneste, Y.; Magistrelli, G.; Gauchat, J.; Haeuw, J.; Aubry, J.; Nakamura, K.;
Kawakami-Honda, N.; Goetsch, L.; Sawamura, T.; Bonnefoy, J.; et al. Involvement of LOX-1 in
dendritic cell-mediated antigen cross-presentation. Immunity 2002, 17, 353–362.
178. Chalmin, F.; Ladoire, S.; Mignot, G.; Vincent, J.; Bruchard, M.; Remy-Martin, J.P.; Boireau, W.;
Rouleau, A.; Simon, B.; Lanneau, D.; et al. Membrane-associated Hsp72 from tumor-derived
exosomes mediates STAT3-dependent immunosuppressive function of mouse and human
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. J. Clin. Invest. 2010, 120, 457–471.
179. Salari, S.; Seibert, T.; Chen, Y.X.; Hu, T.; Shi, C.; Zhao, X.; Cuerrier, C.M.; Raizman, J.E.;
O’Brien, E.R. Extracellular HSP27 acts as a signaling molecule to activate NF-kappaB in
macrophages. Cell Stress Chaperones 2012, 18, 53–63.
180. Gruden, G.; Bruno, G.; Chaturvedi, N.; Burt, D.; Schalkwijk, C.; Pinach, S.; Stehouwer, C.D.;
Witte, D.R.; Fuller, J.H.; Perin, P.C. Serum heat shock protein 27 and diabetes complications in
the EURODIAB prospective complications study: A novel circulating marker for diabetic
n

Chunk 61:
lar HSP27 acts as a signaling molecule to activate NF-kappaB in
macrophages. Cell Stress Chaperones 2012, 18, 53–63.
180. Gruden, G.; Bruno, G.; Chaturvedi, N.; Burt, D.; Schalkwijk, C.; Pinach, S.; Stehouwer, C.D.;
Witte, D.R.; Fuller, J.H.; Perin, P.C. Serum heat shock protein 27 and diabetes complications in
the EURODIAB prospective complications study: A novel circulating marker for diabetic
neuropathy. Diabetes 2008, 57, 1966–1970.
181. Joachim, S.C.; Bruns, K.; Lackner, K.J.; Pfeiffer, N.; Grus, F.H. Antibodies to alpha B-crystallin,
vimentin, and heat shock protein 70 in aqueous humor of patients with normal tension glaucoma
and IgG antibody patterns against retinal antigen in aqueous humor. Curr. Eye Res. 2007, 32,
501–509.
182. Tezel, G.; Wax, M.B. The mechanisms of hsp27 antibody-mediated apoptosis in retinal neuronal
cells. J. Neurosci. 2000, 20, 3552–3562.
183. Lu, H.; Ouyang, W.; Huang, C. Inflammation, a key event in cancer development. Mol. Cancer
Res. 2006, 4, 221–233.
184. Alford, K.A.; Glennie, S.; Turrell, B.R.; Rawlinson, L.; Saklatvala, J.; Dean, J.L. HSP27
functions in inflammatory gene expression and TAK1-mediated signalling. J. Biol. Chem. 2007,
282, 6232–6241.
185. Rothbard, J.B.; Kurnellas, M.P.; Brownell, S.; Adams, C.M.; Su, L.; Axtell, R.C.; Chen, R.;
Fathman, C.G.; Robinson, W.H.; Steinman, L. Therapeutic effects of systemic administration of
chaperone alphaB-crystallin associated with binding proinflammatory plasma proteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 2012, 287, 9708–9721.
186. Mehlen, P.; Préville, X.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Arrigo, A.-P. Human hsp27, Drosophila hsp27 and
human αB-crystallin expression-mediated increase in glutathione is essential for the protective
activity of these protein against TNFα-induced cell death. EMBO J. 1996, 15, 2695–2706.
187. Arrigo, A.P. Small stress proteins: Chaperones that act as regulators of intracellular redox state
and programmed cell death. Biol. Chem. 1998, 379, 19–26.
188. Park, Y.M.; Han, M.Y.; Blackburn, R.V.

Chunk 62:
a hsp27 and
human αB-crystallin expression-mediated increase in glutathione is essential for the protective
activity of these protein against TNFα-induced cell death. EMBO J. 1996, 15, 2695–2706.
187. Arrigo, A.P. Small stress proteins: Chaperones that act as regulators of intracellular redox state
and programmed cell death. Biol. Chem. 1998, 379, 19–26.
188. Park, Y.M.; Han, M.Y.; Blackburn, R.V.; Lee, Y.J. Overexpression of HSP25 reduces the level
of TNF alpha-induced oxidative DNA damage biomarker, 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine, in
L929 cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 1998, 174, 27–34.
189. Rogalla, T.; Ehrnsperger, M.; Preville, X.; Kotlyarov, A.; Lutsch, G.; Ducasse, C.; Paul, C.;
Wieske, M.; Arrigo, A.P.; Buchner, J.; et al. Regulation of Hsp27 oligomerization, chaperone
function, and protective activity against oxidative stress/tumor necrosis factor alpha by
phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274, 18947–18956.
190. Arrigo, A.P. Hsp27: Novel regulator of intracellular redox state. IUBMB Life 2001, 52, 303–307.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 362
191. Merendino, A.M.; Paul, C.; Vignola, A.M.; Costa, M.A.; Melis, M.; Chiappara, G.; Izzo, V.;
Bousquet, J.; Arrigo, A.P. Heat shock protein-27 protects human bronchial epithelial cells against
oxidative stress-mediated apoptosis: Possible implication in asthma. Cell Stress Chaperones 2002,
7, 269–280.
192. Wyttenbach, A.; Sauvageot, O.; Carmichael, J.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Arrigo, A.P.; Rubinsztein, D.C.
Heat shock protein 27 prevents cellular polyglutamine toxicity and suppresses the increase of
reactive oxygen species caused by huntingtin. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2002, 11, 1137–1151.
193. Yan, L.J.; Christians, E.S.; Liu, L.; Xiao, X.; Sohal, R.S.; Benjamin, I.J. Mouse heat shock
transcription factor 1 deficiency alters cardiac redox homeostasis and increases mitochondrial
oxidative damage. EMBO J. 2002, 21, 5164–5172.
194. Arrigo, A.P.; Virot, S.; Chaufour, S.; Firdaus, W.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Diaz-Latoud, C. Hsp27
consolidates int

Chunk 63:
untingtin. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2002, 11, 1137–1151.
193. Yan, L.J.; Christians, E.S.; Liu, L.; Xiao, X.; Sohal, R.S.; Benjamin, I.J. Mouse heat shock
transcription factor 1 deficiency alters cardiac redox homeostasis and increases mitochondrial
oxidative damage. EMBO J. 2002, 21, 5164–5172.
194. Arrigo, A.P.; Virot, S.; Chaufour, S.; Firdaus, W.; Kretz-Remy, C.; Diaz-Latoud, C. Hsp27
consolidates intracellular redox homeostasis by upholding glutathione in its reduced form and by
decreasing iron intracellular levels. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2005, 7, 414–422.
195. Firdaus, W.J.; Wyttenbach, A.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Currie, R.W.; Arrigo, A.P. Analysis of
oxidative events induced by expanded polyglutamine huntingtin exon 1 that are differentially
restored by expression of heat shock proteins or treatment with an antioxidant. FEBS J. 2006,
273, 3076–3093.
196. Aloy, M.T.; Hadchity, E.; Bionda, C.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Claude, L.; Rousson, R.; Arrigo, A.P.;
Rodriguez-Lafrasse, C. Protective role of Hsp27 protein against gamma radiation-induced
apoptosis and radiosensitization effects of Hsp27 gene silencing in different human tumor cells.
Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2008, 70, 543–553.
197. Christians, E.S.; Ishiwata, T.; Benjamin, I.J. Small heat shock proteins in redox metabolism:
Implications for cardiovascular diseases. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2012, 44, 1632–1645.
198. Chen, H.; Zheng, C.; Zhang, Y.; Chang, Y.Z.; Qian, Z.M.; Shen, X. Heat shock protein 27
downregulates the transferrin receptor 1-mediated iron uptake. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2006,
38, 1402–1416.
199. Preville, X.; Gaestel, M.; Arrigo, A.P. Phosphorylation is not essential for protection of L929
cells by Hsp25 against H2O2-mediated disruption actin cytoskeleton, a protection which appears
related to the redox change mediated by Hsp25. Cell Stress Chaperones 1998, 3, 177–187.
200. Kim, E.H.; Lee, H.J.; Lee, D.H.; Bae, S.; Soh, J.W.; Jeoung, D.; Kim, J.; Cho, C.K.; Lee, Y.J.;
Lee, Y.S. Inhibition of he

Chunk 64:
le, X.; Gaestel, M.; Arrigo, A.P. Phosphorylation is not essential for protection of L929
cells by Hsp25 against H2O2-mediated disruption actin cytoskeleton, a protection which appears
related to the redox change mediated by Hsp25. Cell Stress Chaperones 1998, 3, 177–187.
200. Kim, E.H.; Lee, H.J.; Lee, D.H.; Bae, S.; Soh, J.W.; Jeoung, D.; Kim, J.; Cho, C.K.; Lee, Y.J.;
Lee, Y.S. Inhibition of heat shock protein 27-mediated resistance to DNA damaging agents by a
novel PKC delta-V5 heptapeptide. Cancer Res. 2007, 67, 6333–6341.
201. Kuo, W.Y.; Tang, T.K. Effects of G6PD overexpression in NIH3T3 cells treated with tert-butyl
hydroperoxide or paraquat. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1998, 24, 1130–1138.
202. Salvemini, F.; Franze, A.; Iervolino, A.; Filosa, S.; Salzano, S.; Ursini, M.V. Enhanced glutathione
levels and oxidoresistance mediated by increased glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274, 2750–2757.
203. McCollum, A.K.; Teneyck, C.J.; Sauer, B.M.; Toft, D.O.; Erlichman, C. Up-regulation of heat
shock protein 27 induces resistance to 17-allylamino-demethoxygeldanamycin through a
glutathione-mediated mechanism. Cancer Res. 2006, 66, 10967–10975.
204. Aoki, Y.; Feldman, G.M.; Tosato, G. Inhibition of STAT3 signaling induces apoptosis and
decreases survivin expression in primary effusion lymphoma. Blood 2003, 101, 1535–1542.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 363
205. Brierley, M.M.; Fish, E.N. Stats: Multifaceted regulators of transcription. J. Interferon
Cytokine Res. 2005, 25, 733–744.
206. Gritsko, T.; Williams, A.; Turkson, J.; Kaneko, S.; Bowman, T.; Huang, M.; Nam, S.; Eweis, I.;
Diaz, N.; Sullivan, D.; et al. Persistent activation of stat3 signaling induces survivin gene
expression and confers resistance to apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. Clin. Cancer Res.
2006, 12, 11–19.
207. Diaz, N.; Minton, S.; Cox, C.; Bowman, T.; Gritsko, T.; Garcia, R.; Eweis, I.; Wloch, M.;
Livingston, S.; Seijo, E.; et al. Activation of stat3 in prim

Chunk 65:
n, T.; Huang, M.; Nam, S.; Eweis, I.;
Diaz, N.; Sullivan, D.; et al. Persistent activation of stat3 signaling induces survivin gene
expression and confers resistance to apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. Clin. Cancer Res.
2006, 12, 11–19.
207. Diaz, N.; Minton, S.; Cox, C.; Bowman, T.; Gritsko, T.; Garcia, R.; Eweis, I.; Wloch, M.;
Livingston, S.; Seijo, E.; et al. Activation of stat3 in primary tumors from high-risk breast
cancer patients is associated with elevated levels of activated SRC and survivin expression.
Clin. Cancer Res. 2006, 12, 20–28.
208. Song, H.; Ethier, S.P.; Dziubinski, M.L.; Lin, J. Stat3 modulates heat shock 27 kDa protein
expression in breast epithelial cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 314, 143–150.
209. Silva, C.M. Role of STATs as downstream signal transducers in Src family kinase-mediated
tumorigenesis. Oncogene 2004, 23, 8017–8023.
210. Yuan, Z.L.; Guan, Y.J.; Wang, L.; Wei, W.; Kane, A.B.; Chin, Y.E. Central role of the threonine
residue within the p+1 loop of receptor tyrosine kinase in STAT3 constitutive phosphorylation in
metastatic cancer cells. Mol. Cell Biol. 2004, 24, 9390–9400.
211. De la Iglesia, N.; Konopka, G.; Puram, S.V.; Chan, J.A.; Bachoo, R.M.; You, M.J.; Levy, D.E.;
Depinho, R.A.; Bonni, A. Identification of a PTEN-regulated STAT3 brain tumor suppressor
pathway. Genes Dev. 2008, 22, 449–462.
212. Lee, J.; Kim, J.C.; Lee, S.E.; Quinley, C.; Kim, H.; Herdman, S.; Corr, M.; Raz, E. Signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) protein suppresses adenoma-to-carcinoma
transition in Apcmin/+ mice via regulation of Snail-1 (SNAI) protein stability. J. Biol. Chem.
2012, 287, 18182–18189.
213. Zheng, R.; Blobel, G.A. GATA transcription factors and cancer. Genes Cancer 2010, 1,
1178–1188.
214. Diaz-Latoud, C.; Buache, E.; Javouhey, E.; Arrigo, A.P. Substitution of the unique cysteine
residue of murine hsp25 interferes with the protective activity of this stress protein through
inhibition of dimer format

Chunk 66:
tion of Snail-1 (SNAI) protein stability. J. Biol. Chem.
2012, 287, 18182–18189.
213. Zheng, R.; Blobel, G.A. GATA transcription factors and cancer. Genes Cancer 2010, 1,
1178–1188.
214. Diaz-Latoud, C.; Buache, E.; Javouhey, E.; Arrigo, A.P. Substitution of the unique cysteine
residue of murine hsp25 interferes with the protective activity of this stress protein through
inhibition of dimer formation. Antioxid. Redox. Signal 2005, 7, 436–445.
215. Ghosh, J.G.; Houck, S.A.; Clark, J.I. Interactive sequences in the molecular chaperone, human
alphaB crystallin modulate the fibrillation of amyloidogenic proteins. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.
2008, 40, 954–967.
216. Colas, P.; Cohen, B.; Jessen, T.; Grishina, I.; McCoy, J.; Brent, R. Genetic selection of peptide
aptamers that recognize and inhibit cyclin-dependent kinase 2. Nature 1996, 380, 548–550.
217. De Chassey, B.; Mikaelian, I.; Mathieu, A.L.; Bickle, M.B.; Olivier, D.; Negre, D.; Cosset, F.L.;
Rudkin, B.B.; Colas, P. An antiproliferative genetic screening identifies a peptide aptamer that
targets calcineurin and upregulates its activity. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2006, 6, 551–549.
218. Bickle, M.B.; Dusserre, E.; Moncorge, O.; Bottin, H.; Colas, P. Selection and characterization
of large collections of peptide aptamers through optimized yeast two-hybrid procedures.
Nat. Protoc. 2006, 1, 1066–1091.
219. Nouvion, A.L.; Thibaut, J.; Lohez, O.D.; Venet, S.; Colas, P.; Gillet, G.; Lalle, P. Modulation of
Nr-13 antideath activity by peptide aptamers. Oncogene 2007, 26, 701–710.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 364
220. Rerole, A.L.; Gobbo, J.; de Thonel, A.; Schmitt, E.; Pais de Barros, J.P.; Hammann, A.;
Lanneau, D.; Fourmaux, E.; Deminov, O.; Micheau, O.; et al. Peptides and aptamers targeting
HSP70: A novel approach for anticancer chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 2011, 71, 484–495.
221. Gibert, B.; Simon, S.; Dimitrova, V.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Arrigo, A.P. Peptide aptamers: Tools to
negatively or positively modulate HSPB1(27) fu

Chunk 67:
L.; Gobbo, J.; de Thonel, A.; Schmitt, E.; Pais de Barros, J.P.; Hammann, A.;
Lanneau, D.; Fourmaux, E.; Deminov, O.; Micheau, O.; et al. Peptides and aptamers targeting
HSP70: A novel approach for anticancer chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 2011, 71, 484–495.
221. Gibert, B.; Simon, S.; Dimitrova, V.; Diaz-Latoud, C.; Arrigo, A.P. Peptide aptamers: Tools to
negatively or positively modulate HSPB1(27) function. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
2013, 368, 20120075.
222. Rocchi, P.; Jugpal, P.; So, A.; Sinneman, S.; Ettinger, S.; Fazli, L.; Nelson, C.; Gleave, M. Small
interference RNA targeting heat-shock protein 27 inhibits the growth of prostatic cell lines and
induces apoptosis via caspase-3 activation in vitro. BJU Int. 2006, 28, 28.
223. Morino, M.; Tsuzuki, T.; Ishikawa, Y.; Shirakami, T.; Yoshimura, M.; Kiyosuke, Y.; Matsunaga, K.;
Yoshikumi, C.; Saijo, N. Specific regulation of HSPs in human tumor cell lines by flavonoids.
In Vivo 1997, 11, 265–270.
224. Tanaka, Y.; Fujiwara, K.; Tanaka, H.; Maehata, K.; Kohno, I. Paclitaxel inhibits expression of
heat shock protein 27 in ovarian and uterine cancer cells. Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 2004, 14,
616–620.
225. Taba, K.; Kuramitsu, Y.; Ryozawa, S.; Yoshida, K.; Tanaka, T.; Mori-Iwamoto, S.; Maehara, S.;
Maehara, Y.; Sakaida, I.; Nakamura, K. KNK437 downregulates heat shock protein 27 of
pancreatic cancer cells and enhances the cytotoxic effect of gemcitabine. Chemotherapy 2011,
57, 12–16.
226. Oba, M.; Yano, S.; Shuto, T.; Suico, M.A.; Eguma, A.; Kai, H. IFN-gamma down-regulates
Hsp27 and enhances hyperthermia-induced tumor cell death in vitro and tumor suppression
in vivo. Int. J. Oncol. 2008, 32, 1317–1324.
227. Kuramitsu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Taba, K.; Suenaga, S.; Ryozawa, S.; Kaino, S.; Sakaida, I.;
Nakamura, K. Heat-shock protein 27 plays the key role in gemcitabine-resistance of pancreatic
cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2012, 32, 2295–2299.
228. Shin, K.D.; Lee, M.Y.; Shin, D.S.; Lee, S.; Son, K.H.; Koh, S.; Paik, Y.

Chunk 68:
 cell death in vitro and tumor suppression
in vivo. Int. J. Oncol. 2008, 32, 1317–1324.
227. Kuramitsu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Taba, K.; Suenaga, S.; Ryozawa, S.; Kaino, S.; Sakaida, I.;
Nakamura, K. Heat-shock protein 27 plays the key role in gemcitabine-resistance of pancreatic
cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2012, 32, 2295–2299.
228. Shin, K.D.; Lee, M.Y.; Shin, D.S.; Lee, S.; Son, K.H.; Koh, S.; Paik, Y.K.; Kwon, B.M.;
Han, D.C. Blocking tumor cell migration and invasion with biphenyl isoxazole derivative
KRIBB3, a synthetic molecule that inhibits Hsp27 phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280,
41439–41448.
229. Heinrich, J.C.; Tuukkanen, A.; Schroeder, M.; Fahrig, T.; Fahrig, R. RP101 (brivudine) binds to
heat shock protein HSP27 (HSPB1) and enhances survival in animals and pancreatic cancer
patients. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 2011, 137, 1349–1361.
230. Resprotect—Prevention of Chemoresistance. Available online: http://www.resprotect.de/
Pipeline-Summary/Pipeline-Summary.html/ (Accessed on 16 November 2013).
231. Faiella, L.; Piaz, F.D.; Bisio, A.; Tosco, A.; de Tommasi, N. A chemical proteomics
approach reveals Hsp27 as a target for proapoptotic clerodane diterpenes. Mol. Biosyst. 2012, 8,
2637–2644.
232. Simon, S.; Michiel, M.; Skouri-Panet, F.; Lechaire, J.P.; Vicart, P.; Tardieu, A. Residue R120 is
essential for the quaternary structure and functional integrity of human alphaB-crystallin.
Biochemistry 2007, 46, 9605–9614.

---PAGE BREAK---

Cancers 2014, 6 365
233. Bagneris, C.; Bateman, O.A.; Naylor, C.E.; Cronin, N.; Boelens, W.C.; Keep, N.H.; Slingsby, C.
Crystal structures of alpha-crystallin domain dimers of alphab-crystallin and hsp20. J. Mol. Biol.
2009, 392, 1242–1252.
234. Mymrikov, E.V.; Seit-Nebi, A.S.; Gusev, N.B. Large potentials of small heat shock proteins.
Physiol. Rev. 2011, 91, 1123–1159.
235. Fragoso, M.A.; Patel, A.K.; Nakamura, R.E.; Yi, H.; Surapaneni, K.; Hackam, A.S. The
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway cross-talks with STAT3 signaling to regulate s

Chunk 69:
ures of alpha-crystallin domain dimers of alphab-crystallin and hsp20. J. Mol. Biol.
2009, 392, 1242–1252.
234. Mymrikov, E.V.; Seit-Nebi, A.S.; Gusev, N.B. Large potentials of small heat shock proteins.
Physiol. Rev. 2011, 91, 1123–1159.
235. Fragoso, M.A.; Patel, A.K.; Nakamura, R.E.; Yi, H.; Surapaneni, K.; Hackam, A.S. The
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway cross-talks with STAT3 signaling to regulate survival of retinal
pigment epithelium cells. PLoS One 2012, 7, e46892.
236. Zantema, A.; Vries, M.V.-D.; Maasdam, D.; Bol, S.; Eb, A.V.D. Heat shock protein 27 and
αB-cristallin can form a complex, which dissociates by heat shock. J. Biol. Chem. 1992, 267,
12936–12941.
237. Mymrikov, E.V.; Seit-Nebi, A.S.; Gusev, N.B. Heterooligomeric complexes of human small heat
shock proteins. Cell Stress Chaperones 2012, 17, 157–169.
© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

---PAGE BREAK---



