Chunk 1:
Cell Stress Promotes the Association of Phosphorylated
HspB1 with F-Actin
Joseph P. Clarke, Karen M. Mearow*
DivisionofBiomedicalSciences,NeurosciencesGraduateProgram,FacultyofMedicine,MemorialUniversityofNewfoundland,St.John’s,Newfoundland,Canada
Abstract
Previous studies have suggested that the small heat shock protein, HspB1, has a direct influence on the dynamics of
cytoskeletalelements,inparticular,filamentousactin(F-actin)polymerization.Inthisstudywehaveassessedtheinfluence
of HspB1 phosphorylation on its interaction(s) with F-actin. We first determined the distribution of endogenous non-
phosphorylated HspB1, phosphorylated HspB1 and F-actin in neuroendocrine PC12 cells by immunocytochemistry and
confocal microscopy. We then investigated a potential direct interaction between HspB1 with F-actin by precipitating F-
actindirectlywithbiotinylatedphalloidinfollowedbyWesternanalyses;thereverseimmunoprecipitationofHspB1wasalso
carriedout.ThephosphorylationinfluenceofHspB1inthisinteractionwasinvestigatedbyusingpharmacologicinhibition
ofp38MAPK.Incontrolcells,HspB1interactswithF-actinasapredominantlynon-phosphorylatedprotein,butsubsequent
tostressthereisaredistributionofHspB1tothecytoskeletalfractionandasignificantlyincreasedassociationofpHspB1
with F-actin. Our data demonstrate HspB1 is found in a complex with F-actin both in phosphorylated and non-
phosphorylatedforms,withanincreasedassociationofpHspB1withF-actinafterheatstress.Overall,ourstudycombines
bothcellularandbiochemicalapproachestoshowcellularlocalizationanddirectdemonstrationofaninteractionbetween
endogenous HspB1 and F-actinusingmethodolgy thatspecifically isolatesF-actin.
Citation: Clarke JP, Mearow KM (2013) Cell Stress Promotes the Association of Phosphorylated HspB1 with F-Actin. PLoS ONE 8(7): e68978. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0068978
Editor:DavidD.Roberts,CenterforCancerResearch,NationalCancerInstitute,UnitedStatesofAmerica
ReceivedApril4,2013;AcceptedJune10,2013;PublishedJuly10,2013
Copyright:(cid

Chunk 2:
1 and F-actinusingmethodolgy thatspecifically isolatesF-actin.
Citation: Clarke JP, Mearow KM (2013) Cell Stress Promotes the Association of Phosphorylated HspB1 with F-Actin. PLoS ONE 8(7): e68978. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0068978
Editor:DavidD.Roberts,CenterforCancerResearch,NationalCancerInstitute,UnitedStatesofAmerica
ReceivedApril4,2013;AcceptedJune10,2013;PublishedJuly10,2013
Copyright:(cid:1)2013Clarke,Mearow.Thisisanopen-accessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense,whichpermits
unrestricteduse,distribution,andreproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalauthorandsourcearecredited.
Funding:ThisworkwassupportedbyanNSERCDiscoveryGranttoKMM.Thefundershadnoroleinstudydesign,datacollectionandanalysis,decisionto
publish,orpreparationofthemanuscript.
CompetingInterests:Theauthorshavedeclaredthatnocompetinginterestsexist.
*E-mail:kmearow@mun.ca
Introduction activated MAPK pathway involving the activation of MAPK-
activated protein kinase-2 (MAPKAP-K2; MK2) by p38-MAPK
The maintenance of cytoskeletal integrity is a key determinant [13],aswellasotherkinasesthathavebeenimplicatedinHspB1
inthesurvivalandgrowthofcellsduringstressfulcellularepisodes,
phosphorylation [7]. Phosphorylation of multimeric HspB1 on
suchasradiation,inflammation,orheatstress.Indiseasessuchas
three conserved serines (human Ser15, 78 and 82; rodent Ser15
thecombinedmotorandsensoryneurondisorderCharcot-Marie-
and86;hamsterSer15and90)byMK2resultsintheformationof
Toothdisease, orAlexander disease,perturbationsincytoskeletal
smaller oligomeric HspB1 structures that are thought to be the
integritycanleadtoeitheranestablishmentorprogressionofthe
mainstructuralunitsofHspB1andpotentiallycarryoutitsmain
disease state [1–3].
functions [7,14,15]. Additionally, changes in the conserved
An intrinsic mechanism of importance in modulating cellular
domains of HspB1 can alter the stability of the oligomeric
responses to stress involves the regulation of a set of highly
structure of HspB

Chunk 3:
e the
integritycanleadtoeitheranestablishmentorprogressionofthe
mainstructuralunitsofHspB1andpotentiallycarryoutitsmain
disease state [1–3].
functions [7,14,15]. Additionally, changes in the conserved
An intrinsic mechanism of importance in modulating cellular
domains of HspB1 can alter the stability of the oligomeric
responses to stress involves the regulation of a set of highly
structure of HspB1, and thus regulate its downstream effects on
conserved cellular proteins known as heat shock proteins. These
other proteins[11,16,17].
proteinsaremodulatedbycellularstressorsandactpredominantly
HspB1 is involved in the maintenance of cytoskeletal integrity
as protein chaperones, with some proteins in this family having
and has been shown to interact with various elements including
innate refolding mechanisms to refold damaged proteins [4,5].
actin, tubulin, neurofilament, keratins and glial fibrillary acidic
Their cellular function is dependent upon many factors, such as
protein (reviewed in [18–20]). The interactions between HspB1
increased protein expression, post-translation modifications, al-
and actin have been studied extensively in a variety of different
tered oligomerization state and cellular distribution changes.
experimental systems, and HspB1 has been reported to interact
Thesefactorscanbefurtherregulatedbycell-typespecific,stress-
variably with actin filaments or monomeric actin to influence
activated pathways, including p38 mitogen-activated protein
actin polymerization and/or depolymerization [18,20–26]. The
kinase (MAPK) andc-JunN-terminal kinase pathways[6,7].
necessity of phosphorylation of HspB1 for its interactions with
OfparticularinterestisthesmallheatshockproteinB1(HspB1)
actin has been the subject of much discussion [11,18,20,26,27].
whichisamemberoftheclassofsmallheatshockproteins(sHsps,
Models for HspB1 regulation of actin filament dynamics
15–30kDa).Likeotherheatshockproteins,HspB1actspredom-
propose that non-phosphorylated monomeric HspB1 inhib

Chunk 4:
cessity of phosphorylation of HspB1 for its interactions with
OfparticularinterestisthesmallheatshockproteinB1(HspB1)
actin has been the subject of much discussion [11,18,20,26,27].
whichisamemberoftheclassofsmallheatshockproteins(sHsps,
Models for HspB1 regulation of actin filament dynamics
15–30kDa).Likeotherheatshockproteins,HspB1actspredom-
propose that non-phosphorylated monomeric HspB1 inhibits
inantly as a protein chaperone, but unlike the others, does not
actin polymerization by acting as an actin-capping protein or by
displayanyinnaterefoldingcapabilities[8,9].HspB1playsarole
binding to and sequestering G-actin monomers, while phos-
inavarietyofcellularmechanismswhichcanbemodulatedbyits
phorylation reverses this effect [18,21,28]. However, a direct
posttranslationalstatus[10–12].Itisphosphorylatedbythestress-
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 1 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
interation between HspB1 and either G- or F-actin has been Cell cultures were exposed to10mM SB203580for 1hr, after
questioned [26]. whichcultureswereeitherincubatedforanadditional30mins,or
In vitro studies have demonstrated interactions between actin stressed with heat shock at 42uC for 30mins (i.e., 1 hr inhibitor
andrecombinantHspB1[21,29–32].Similarly,anumberofinvivo treatment R 30mins heat stress R immediate collection of
studieshaveshowninteractionsofHspB1constructswithactinby protein). Optimal inhibitor concentrations were determined
immunoprecipitatingtagged-HspB1orcolocalizationatacellular empirically[39].Immediatelyaftertreatments,cellswerecollected
level of F-actin and HspB1, often employing cells overexpressing and thenlysed with actinstabilization buffer (ASB:1% Triton-X
variousconstructsofHspB1[12,24,27,33–35].Wehavealsoused 100, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10mM ethylenedi-
a similar approach in examining the role of HspB1 and its aminetetraacetic acid, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 200pM sodium
phosphorylation status in con

Chunk 5:
erecollected
level of F-actin and HspB1, often employing cells overexpressing and thenlysed with actinstabilization buffer (ASB:1% Triton-X
variousconstructsofHspB1[12,24,27,33–35].Wehavealsoused 100, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10mM ethylenedi-
a similar approach in examining the role of HspB1 and its aminetetraacetic acid, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 200pM sodium
phosphorylation status in contributing to neurite growth from vanadate,200pMsodiumfluoride,1completeproteaseinhibitor
primary sensory neurons [36,37]. We have observed co-localiza- cocktail tablet, 0.5mM ATP and Tris-Buffered Saline, pH 7.4).
tionofF-actinandHspB1inneurons,andreportedahigherlevel After lysis, samples were either centrifuged at 15,0006g for
of localization of F-actin with a non-phosphorylatable HspB1 10mintobeseparatedintoTritonX-100soluble(cytosolic;lysate)
construct compared to pseudophosphorylated HspB1. In the and Triton X-100 insoluble (cytoskeletal; pellet) samples, or were
presentstudy,wewereinterestedindeterminingwhetherthereisa left astotal lysate (crudesample).
directinteractionofendogenousHspB1withF-actinandwhether
HspB1 phosphorylation would influence this. In vitro F/G-Actin and Biotinylated-Phalloidin Pull-down
In this study we have employed PC12 cells that endogenously Non-muscle actin was prepared invitro into globular actin (G-
express HspB1, and modulated HspB1 phosphorylation status by Actin) or filamentous actin (F-actin), as per the manufacturer’s
inhibitor treatmentineithera normalorstressed state.Immuno- protocol (Cytoskeleton), and then subsequently pulled-down with
cytochemistry,confocalmicroscopyandwesternblotanalysiswere 5 mg of biotinylated-phalloidin. Briefly, 2.5mg and 5.0 mg
employed to determine the cellular distribution of F-actin and samples of both G-Actin and F-actin were diluted in a total
HspB1followingcellularstress.ByisolatingF-actinspecificallyor volume of 200mL in TBS, and 5 mg of biotinylated-phalloidin
HspB1 via pull-down assays, we investigat

Chunk 6:
chemistry,confocalmicroscopyandwesternblotanalysiswere 5 mg of biotinylated-phalloidin. Briefly, 2.5mg and 5.0 mg
employed to determine the cellular distribution of F-actin and samples of both G-Actin and F-actin were diluted in a total
HspB1followingcellularstress.ByisolatingF-actinspecificallyor volume of 200mL in TBS, and 5 mg of biotinylated-phalloidin
HspB1 via pull-down assays, we investigated any association was added to each sample. G-actin/biotinylated-phalloidin and
between the two proteins and the influence of HspB1 phosphor- untreated samples (actin-containing sample lacking phalloidin)
ylationstatusonthisassociation.Ourresultsdemonstratethatheat were incubated for one hour at 4uC, with constant rotation on a
stress induces redistribution of HpsB1 to the cytoskeletal protein bench-top rotator. F-actin/biotinylated-phalloidin and untreated
fraction and that endogenous HspB1 is associated with F-actin samples (actin-containing sample lacking phalloidin) were incu-
regardless of the phosphorylation status of HspB1. HspB1 is bated for one hour at room temperature (,22uC), with constant
phosphorylated on both serines 15 and 86 after stress and also rotation on a bench-top rotator. After one hour, 20 mL of
interacts with F-actin. Immunocytochemistry and confocal imag- streptavidin-coupled DynabeadsH were added only to the
ing show a correspondence with the biochemical analyses, and biotinylated-phalloidin treated samples and these were also
further suggest a differential compartmentalized distribution of incubated for one hour at 4uC (G-Actin sample), or room
phosphorylated andnon-phosphorylated HspB1.Takentogether, temperature (F-actin sample), with constant rotation on a bench-
our data provide new evidence of a direct interaction of HspB1 top rotator. Pull-down at this point was considered to be
specifically with F-actin that supports its role in modulating the complete, the samples were then isolated using a block magnet
actincytoskeletal dynamics. and20ml

Chunk 7:
ylated andnon-phosphorylated HspB1.Takentogether, temperature (F-actin sample), with constant rotation on a bench-
our data provide new evidence of a direct interaction of HspB1 top rotator. Pull-down at this point was considered to be
specifically with F-actin that supports its role in modulating the complete, the samples were then isolated using a block magnet
actincytoskeletal dynamics. and20mlof26loading dyewas added.Supernatants frompull-
downs were collected and used for subsequent biochemical
Materials and Methods analysis to assess efficiency of the pull-down. DynabeadH pellets
were washed three times with TBS, with the samples being used
Reagents and Antibodies for biochemical analysis after the third wash. Immunoblots of
Standardcellculture,lipofectionreagents,streptavidin-coupled pull-downs (phalloidin interacting samples), untreated superna-
DynabeadsH (Cat. No.112-05D), DynabeadsH Protein A (Cat. tants (no biotinylated-phalloidin or DynabeadsH added) and
No.100.01D) and DynabeadsH Protein G (Cat. No.100.03D) supernatants after pull-down (non-phalloidin interacting samples)
were purchased from Invitrogen (Burlington, ON, CAN). In vitro were then carried out. More specifically, 656mL of untreated
actinbindingproteinassaybiochemistrykit(Cat.No.BK013)was sample and supernatants after pull-down (approximately 1/3 of
obtainedfromCytoskeleton(Denver,CO).Biotinylated-phalloidin original volumes), were electrophoresed along with the precipi-
(Cat. No. P8716) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Canada Ltd. tated samples and immunoblotted with anti-actin antibodies.
(Oakville, ON, CAN). The pharmacologic inhibitor of p38
MAPK, SB203580 (Cat. No.559389) was purchased from Pull-Down Assay – cellular samples
Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA). BCA protein assay solutions, Previousstudieshaveshownthatbiotinylated-phalloidincanbe
immunoblot reagents and membranes were purchased from usedtospecificallypull-downF-actinfromtissue[40].Byadapting
ThermoFisher Scientific (Nepean, ON, CAN

Chunk 8:
, ON, CAN). The pharmacologic inhibitor of p38
MAPK, SB203580 (Cat. No.559389) was purchased from Pull-Down Assay – cellular samples
Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA). BCA protein assay solutions, Previousstudieshaveshownthatbiotinylated-phalloidincanbe
immunoblot reagents and membranes were purchased from usedtospecificallypull-downF-actinfromtissue[40].Byadapting
ThermoFisher Scientific (Nepean, ON, CAN) and General this technique to our study, we performed pull-downs on Triton
Electric (Baie D’Urfe, QC, CAN), respectively. Amaxa reagents X-100 insoluble (cytoskeletal) protein samples resuspended in
were purchased fromAmaxa Biosystems(Walkersville, MD). ASB, and crude total protein samples using biotinylated-phalloi-
Primary and secondary antibodies used in this study are din. Both samples were used in order to assess F-actin pull-down
outlined inTable1. efficiency, which was ultimately determined to be similar.
Biotinylated-phalloidin (56mg) was added to the protein samples
Cell Cultures and Treatments andtheywereincubatedforonehrat4uCwithconstantrotation.
Neuroendocrine rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells (ATTC Subsequently, 206mL of streptavidin-coupled magnetic Dyna-
CRL-1721.1; [38]) were grown on collagen coated T-25 culture beadsHwereaddedandthiswasincubatedforanadditionalhour
flasks and maintained at 37uC with 5% CO in DMEM, at 4uC with constant rotation. The magnetic beads were isolated
2
supplemented with 10% horse serum, 5% fetal bovine serum usingablockmagnetandwashedthreetimeswithPBS,withthe
and1%P/S/G.Atotalof46106cellswereusedforeachsample. samples being used for biochemical analysis after the third wash.
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 2 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Table1. Listofprimary and secondary antibodies,with experimental dilutions, usedforimmunoblotting (IB),
immunocytochemistry (ICC)and immunoprecipitation (IP).
Antibody Method Dilution Company Cat
Rabbitanti-actin IB 1:500 Sigma-Aldrich A2066
Rabbi

Chunk 9:
emical analysis after the third wash.
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 2 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Table1. Listofprimary and secondary antibodies,with experimental dilutions, usedforimmunoblotting (IB),
immunocytochemistry (ICC)and immunoprecipitation (IP).
Antibody Method Dilution Company Cat
Rabbitanti-actin IB 1:500 Sigma-Aldrich A2066
Rabbitanti-Hsp25 IB/IP 1:1000 EnzoLifeSciences SPA-801-F
Rabbitanti-phosphoHsp27(ser15) IB 1:1000 EnzoLifeSciences SPA-525
Rabbitanti-phosphoHsp27(ser82) IB/ICC 1:1000 NewEnglandBiolabs 2406S
HSP-goatanti-rabbitIgG IB 1:10000 ThermoFisherScientific 31460
Mouseanti-Hsp27 ICC 1:100 SantaCruzBiotech SC-51956
Rabbitanti-phospho-Hsp27(Ser15) ICC 1:100 ThermoFisherScientific PA1-018
AlexaFluorH488-Phalloidin ICC 1:250 Invitrogen A12379
AlexaFluorH405Goatanti-mouseIgG ICC 1:500 Invitrogen 31553
DylightTM649Donkeyanti-RabbitIgG ICC 1:500 JacksonImmunoresearch P711-495-152
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.t001
Pull-downsofHspB1wereperformedsimilarly,usingrabbitanti- (Olympus Flowview 1000 confocal laser scanning microscope).
HspB1 antibody (56mg) and a 1:1 mixture of DynabeadsH A/G Image acquisition for the different samples was carried out using
that were substituted for biotinylated-phalloidin and streptavidin- similarscanningparameters(laserpower,HVPMTs,andnumber
coupled magnetic DynabeadsH,respectively. of optical slices). Scanned stacks were compiled as individual
images, and composite digital images were prepared in Adobe
BiochemicalAnalysisofProteinFractionsandPull-Downs Photoshop CS.
Protein concentrations of lysates were determined using the
BCA protein assay. Equivalent amounts of protein (20–256mg) 3-Dimensional Imaging of Cellular Expression
were electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-PAGE, separated, and Immunocytochemicalconfocalimageswerevolumerenderedin
transferredontoanitrocellulosemembrane;PonceauRedstaining 3 dimensions (3D) using Imaris software (Bitplane Inc., South
was used t

Chunk 10:
tein concentrations of lysates were determined using the
BCA protein assay. Equivalent amounts of protein (20–256mg) 3-Dimensional Imaging of Cellular Expression
were electrophoresed on a 10% SDS-PAGE, separated, and Immunocytochemicalconfocalimageswerevolumerenderedin
transferredontoanitrocellulosemembrane;PonceauRedstaining 3 dimensions (3D) using Imaris software (Bitplane Inc., South
was used to assess the equivalency of protein loading. Blots were Windsor, CT). Confocal image stacks were initially saved as.oib
then blocked either with 3% skim milk, or 5% BSA solution, filesandthenimportedintoImaris.Imageswerecroppedin3Dto
depending on whether phospho-antibodies were used or not, focusonaregionofinterestandrenderedemployingtheSurfaces
incubatedat4uCovernightwithprimaryantibodies(Table1)and toolwithintheSurpassmoduleofImaris.Imageswerethensaved
developed the next day. Bands were detected using peroxidase as.tif files and Adobe Photoshop CS was used to prepare
conjugated secondary antibodies and SuperSignalH West Pico compositeimages.
Chemiluminescent Substrate.
Analysis of the pull-down samples was carried out as follows. Densitometric and Statistical Analysis
Afterthefinalwashofthepull-downpellets,thesupernatantswere DensitometricanalysesoftriplicateWesternimmunoblotswere
discarded and loading dye with dithiothreitol (DTT) was added. carried out using ImageJ and a calibrated grey value scale (NIH,
Thesesampleswerepulsesonicated(3pulsesof3 seceachwiththe Bethesda, Maryland); ratios of HspB1 expression (total and
power set to 35% of maximum using a model 16–850 Virsonic phosphorylated) were compared to actin expression. Densitomet-
Cell Disrupter) and then separated once again using a block ric analyses of confocal images (using average gray scale
magnet. The supernatants were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE assessment)werealsocarriedoutusingImageJ,withaveragegrey
and treatedasoutlined above. value expression of pSer15-HspB1, pSer86-HspB1 and total
HspB1beingcalculated.

Chunk 11:
osphorylated) were compared to actin expression. Densitomet-
Cell Disrupter) and then separated once again using a block ric analyses of confocal images (using average gray scale
magnet. The supernatants were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE assessment)werealsocarriedoutusingImageJ,withaveragegrey
and treatedasoutlined above. value expression of pSer15-HspB1, pSer86-HspB1 and total
HspB1beingcalculated.Statisticalanalyseswereperformedusing
Immunocytochemistry of PC12 Cells GraphPad Prism 4 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) with
PC12 cells were cultured on collagen-coated 16-well chamber significancedeterminedbyone-wayANOVAandposthoctesting
slides at ,1000 cells/well. Cells were treated with 10mM via Tukey’s test.
SB203580 (p38 MAPK inhibitor), with and without a heat stress
at 42uC for 30mins (1hr inhibitor treatment R 30mins heat Results
stress R immediate fixation of cells). After treatment, cells were
fixed immediately using 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for Cellular Distribution of Total HspB1 and Phosphorylated
20mins, permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked with HspB1
10% horse serum in PBS. Cells were incubated with primary We initially examined the cellular distribution of HspB1,
antibodiesatappropriateconcentrations(Table1)for16–20hrsat phospho-HspB1 and F-actin in control conditions compared to
4uC, rinsed with TBS supplemented with 0.025% Tween 20, heatstress.PC12cells wereeithernottreated(vehiclecontrol)or
pH 7.2 (TBST), and subsequently incubated with fluorophore- treatedwiththep38MAPKinhibitorSB203580(10 mM)for1 hr
conjugated secondary antibodies at appropriate concentrations prior to stress; the cells were then heat-shocked for 30min at
(Table 1) for 1–2hr. Cells were washed again three times with 42uC, and fixed immediately. The distribution of HspB1,
TBST and cover-slipped with GelvatolTM. Images were acquired phospho-HspB1 and F-actin was visualized by confocal imaging.
ineachofthreechannels(405 nm,488nmand649nm)bylaser Cellular localization of Hsp

Chunk 12:
e concentrations prior to stress; the cells were then heat-shocked for 30min at
(Table 1) for 1–2hr. Cells were washed again three times with 42uC, and fixed immediately. The distribution of HspB1,
TBST and cover-slipped with GelvatolTM. Images were acquired phospho-HspB1 and F-actin was visualized by confocal imaging.
ineachofthreechannels(405 nm,488nmand649nm)bylaser Cellular localization of HspB1 was determined with immunocy-
scanning confocal microscopy with sequential Z-stage scanning tochemistry by using antibodies specific for pSer15-HspB1,
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 3 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
pSer86-HspB1 and total HspB1, while F-actin was specifically In the presence of the p38MAPK inhibitor (SB) plus HS
visualized withfluorescently labeledPhalloidin. (SB+HS),thepHspB1stainingwassomewhatattenuated(Fig.3C),
In the control conditions, HspB1 was localized primarily appearingsimilartothecontrolcondition.Manyofthecellswere
throughout the cytosol, in a somewhat granular appearance. In roundedandtheF-actinstainingappearlessdistintthanintheHS
somecells withlamellopodia,HspB1wasobserved attheleading alone condition (Fig. 3B compared to Fig. 2B). There was still
edges(Fig.1A,arrows).pHspB1wasalsodetectedthroughoutthe colocalizationoftheHspB1andF-actin,butcloserexaminationof
cells, and at the leading edges of lamellopodia or ruffles (Fig. 1C the cells revealed that there seemed to be an absence of the
arrows).ICCofpHspB1-Ser15ispresented,althoughthepattern blebbing/rufflingthatwasapparentwithHSalone;thestainingof
of pHspB1-Ser86 staining is similar (data not shown). F-actin (as HspB1andF-actindidnotappeargranularorpunctateinnature
detected by Alexa-488 Phalloidin labelling) was observed at the (compareFig. 2Ato3A, 2Bto3B).
cellular periphery outlining the cell boundaries (Fig. 1B, arrow- Three-dimensional images of each channel separately and in
head), as well as being found in a more punctate distribution c

Chunk 13:
 pHspB1-Ser86 staining is similar (data not shown). F-actin (as HspB1andF-actindidnotappeargranularorpunctateinnature
detected by Alexa-488 Phalloidin labelling) was observed at the (compareFig. 2Ato3A, 2Bto3B).
cellular periphery outlining the cell boundaries (Fig. 1B, arrow- Three-dimensional images of each channel separately and in
head), as well as being found in a more punctate distribution combination provide a more informative view of the distribution
throughout the cell. There was co-localization observed between of HspB1and actinunder eachof theconditions.Representative
F-actin and HspB1, and to a certain extent with the pHspB1 cells(orgroupsofcells)wereselectedfromtheeachoftheimages
(Fig.1D). presentedinFig.1–3and3-dimensionalsurfacesforeachchannel
TheHStreatmentresultedintheroundingofthecellsandthe rendered using Imaris software. Confocal image stacks were
collapseofthecytoskeletonandredistributionofHspB1toaperi- obtained with sequential z-stage scanning over a 5–10mm top-
nuclearlocation(Fig.2A),aclassicalreactionofmanycellstoheat bottom distance of the immunostained cultures, image stacks
shock. Ruffles and membrane blebbing were observed on the imported into Imaris software (Bitplane Corp), and 3D surfaces
surface of many of thecells (Fig.2A–D). In these cells, there was andcellular volumesdisplayed.
againadistinctcolocalizationoftheHspB1,pHspB1andactinin Incellsselectedfromthecontrolcondition(Fig.1E–R),HspB1
apunctateorgranularpatternwithinthecells,andassociatedwith is distributed rather evenly throughout the cytoplasm, and
the membrane (Fig. 2A–C, arrows). There was an apparent colocalized with both F-actin and basal levels of pHspB1 for the
increaseintheamountofpHspB1stainingandthisappearedtobe mostpart.However,pHspB1isalsoclearlyobservedattheleading
colocalized withtheF-actin (Fig.2B–C,arrows). edges of the cells (perhaps in focal contacts/adhesions) and co-
localized with F-actin in these areas (Fig. 1J, Q). F-actin is
Figure 1. Cellular localizat

Chunk 14:
here was an apparent colocalized with both F-actin and basal levels of pHspB1 for the
increaseintheamountofpHspB1stainingandthisappearedtobe mostpart.However,pHspB1isalsoclearlyobservedattheleading
colocalized withtheF-actin (Fig.2B–C,arrows). edges of the cells (perhaps in focal contacts/adhesions) and co-
localized with F-actin in these areas (Fig. 1J, Q). F-actin is
Figure 1. Cellular localization of HspB1 and F-actin in control PC12 cells. Low passage PC12 cells were cultured on collagen-coated
coverslips, and processed for immunocytochemistry using antibodies directed against total HspB1 (Stressgen SPA801) or phospho-S15-HspB1
followedbyfluorescentlytaggedsecondaryantibodies;F-actinwaslabelledusingAlexa-488-phalloidin.PanelA-D:PC12cellsvisualizedwithconfocal
microscopy;imagesrepresentthez-stackprojections.A–HspB1(blue);B-phalloidin(green);C-pS15-HspB1(magenta);D-mergedimage.PanelsE-K,
L-R:three-dimensionalrenderingofimmunostainedsurfacesascompiledbyImarissoftwareofcells(boxesinD)selectedfromthelowpowerview.E,
L -HspB1 (blue); F, M - Phalloidin (green); G, N - pHspB1(magenta); H, O - all 3 together; I, P - HspB1+pHspB1; J, Q – HspB1+Phalloidin; K, R -
pHspB1+Phalloidin.Scalebar–50mm,D;10mm,lowerpanels.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g001
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 4 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure2.CellularlocalizationofHspB1andF-actininPC12cellssubsequenttoaheatshock.LowpassagePC12cellswereculturedon
collagen-coatedcoverslipsandweresubjectedtoa30minheatshock(HS)followedbyimmediatefixation,andprocessingforimmunocytochemistry
usingantibodiesdirectedagainsttotalHspB1orphospho-S15-HspB1followedbyfluorescentlytaggedsecondaryantibodies;F-actinwaslabelled
usingAlexa-488-phalloidin.PanelA-D:PC12cellsvisualizedwithconfocalmicroscopy;imagesrepresentthez-stackprojections.A–HspB1(blue);B–
phalloidin(green);C-pS15-HspB1(magenta);D–mergedimage.PanelsE–K,L–R:three-dimensionalrenderingofimmunostainedsurfacesascompi

Chunk 15:
munocytochemistry
usingantibodiesdirectedagainsttotalHspB1orphospho-S15-HspB1followedbyfluorescentlytaggedsecondaryantibodies;F-actinwaslabelled
usingAlexa-488-phalloidin.PanelA-D:PC12cellsvisualizedwithconfocalmicroscopy;imagesrepresentthez-stackprojections.A–HspB1(blue);B–
phalloidin(green);C-pS15-HspB1(magenta);D–mergedimage.PanelsE–K,L–R:three-dimensionalrenderingofimmunostainedsurfacesascompiled
byImarissoftwareofcells(boxesinD)selectedfromthelowpowerview.E,L-HspB1(blue);F,M-Phalloidin(green);G,N–pHspB1(magenta);H,O–
all3together;I,P-HspB1+pHspB1;J,Q–HspB1+Phalloidin;K,R–pHspB1+Phalloidin.Scalebar–10mm.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g002
associatedwithcorticalareas(particularlynoticeableinFig.1F,J, theF-actinstaining,perhaps indicativeofthepresenceofsmaller
K), as well as being found distributed throughout in apparent actinfilaments.
colocalizationwithHspB1andpHspB1.NotethatthecorticalF- TheseresultsshowcolocalizationofHspB1andF-actininboth
actindoes not appeartocompletely overlap withHspB1 in these control and stressed conditions,andsuggest that HspB1 doesnot
examples (Fig.1E,F, H,J). necessarily require phosphorylation in order to interact with F-
WithHS(Fig.2E–R),manyofthecellshaveroundedup,andin actin.
these cells both HspB1 and F-actin appear condensed and Statistical analysis of the imaging data (described in the
collapsed (Fig. 2E–K). There is an increased amount of pHspB1 Methods) confirmed the qualitative expression differences, show-
and this appears associated mainly with the surfaces of the cells ing pHspB1 was significantly upregulated with stress and this
(Fig.2G–I).Inthesecondseriesofcells(Fig.2L–R),theblebbing upregulation attenuated by the inclusion of SB203580; there was
notedaboveismoreclearlyobservedshowingthatpHspB1andF- no significant difference in the expression of total HspB1 in any
actinapparently associated with thesurface of cell. condition (Figure S1).
IncellssubjectedtoHSinthepresenceoftheinhibitor(Fig.3
E–R),thephosphorylationof

Chunk 16:
his
(Fig.2G–I).Inthesecondseriesofcells(Fig.2L–R),theblebbing upregulation attenuated by the inclusion of SB203580; there was
notedaboveismoreclearlyobservedshowingthatpHspB1andF- no significant difference in the expression of total HspB1 in any
actinapparently associated with thesurface of cell. condition (Figure S1).
IncellssubjectedtoHSinthepresenceoftheinhibitor(Fig.3
E–R),thephosphorylationofHspB1isattenuated,butwhatlittle Biochemical Assessment of Hsp and F-actin Distribution
ispresentisstillassociatedwithactinandmembraneblebbing.In
with Stress
onecell,wheretheHspB1hasbecomemainlyperinuclear,much
To further investigate whether the immunocytochemical
of the F-actin remains peripheral, although there is still some
colocalization represents a molecular association of HspB1 with
overlapwiththeperinuclearHspB1.Inthesecells,evenwherethis
F-actin, we carried out a series of biochemical assays using
is essentially no pHspB1 detectable, HspB1 and F-actin still
analyses of protein lysates from cells treated as noted above
colocalize.
(control, 30min HS, SB, and SB+HS). Cells were lysed
Interestingly, in cells where there is no detectable pHspB1
immediately at the end of the experimental treatment (no
(arrowheads, Fig. 3N–O), F-actin appears to be retained in a
recovery from HS) and the intracellular distribution of HspB1
cortical organization though not associated with HspB1. In
and actin was determined by Western blotting of 3 different
another example (Fig. 3F–G), in the absence of pHspB1, there is
preparations: the Triton X-100 soluble (cytosolic lysate), Triton
stillcolocalizationwithHspB1andamorecellulardistributionof
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 5 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure 3. Cellular localization of HspB1 and F-actin in PC12 cells subsequent to a heat shock in the presence of a p38MAPK
inhibitor.LowpassagePC12 cells werecultured oncollagen-coated coverslips, incubatedwith10mM SB203580 for 1hr prior 

Chunk 17:
izationwithHspB1andamorecellulardistributionof
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 5 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure 3. Cellular localization of HspB1 and F-actin in PC12 cells subsequent to a heat shock in the presence of a p38MAPK
inhibitor.LowpassagePC12 cells werecultured oncollagen-coated coverslips, incubatedwith10mM SB203580 for 1hr prior toand duringa
30minheat shock(HS),followedbyimmediatefixationand processing forimmunocytochemistryusingantibodiesdirectedagainsttotalHspB1
(StressgenSPA801)orphospho-S15-HspB1followedbyfluorescentlytaggedsecondaryantibodies;F-actinwaslabelledusingAlexa-488-phalloidin.
PanelA–D:PC12cellsvisualizedwithconfocalmicroscopy;imagesrepresentthez-stackprojections.A–HspB1(blue);B-phalloidin(green);C-pS15-
HspB1(magenta);D-mergedimage.PanelsE–K,L–R:three-dimensionalrenderingofimmunostainedsurfacesascompiledbyImarissoftwareofcells
(boxesinD)selectedfromthelowpowerview.E,L-HspB1(blue);F,M-Phalloidin(green);G,N–pHspB1(magenta);H,O–all3together;I,P–
HspB1+pHspB1;J,Q–HspB1+Phalloidin;K,R-pHspB1+Phalloidin.Scalebar–10mm.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g003
X-100 insoluble (cytoskeletal pellet) and unfractionated total
cellular lysate.
Under control conditions, total HspB1 was primarily found in
the cytosolic and crude total protein fractions, and there was
also a low level of pHspB1 detected in these samples (Fig. 4).
After heat shock (HS), there was an increase in HspB1 in the
cytoskeletal fraction (compare lane 1 with lane 7) associated
with increased phosphorylation of HspB1. With the addition of
the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580, HspB1 phosphorylation
was attenuated as expected, but there appeared to be little effect
on the redistribution of the HspB1 to the cytoskeletal fraction
(Fig. 4). While HS does result in increased expression of HspB1
over a longer time frame (.3 hrs recovery after HS [41]), in
these experiments cells were sampled immediately after the Figure 4. HspB1 is phospho

Chunk 18:
 of
the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580, HspB1 phosphorylation
was attenuated as expected, but there appeared to be little effect
on the redistribution of the HspB1 to the cytoskeletal fraction
(Fig. 4). While HS does result in increased expression of HspB1
over a longer time frame (.3 hrs recovery after HS [41]), in
these experiments cells were sampled immediately after the Figure 4. HspB1 is phosphorylated and redistributed to the
termination of the HS treatment to assess early effects of HspB1 cytoskeletal fraction during cellular stress. PC12 cells were
treatedasdescribedintheMethods,subsequentlylysedandseparated
phosphorylation.
bycellularfractionationintoTritonX-100soluble(cytosolic;lysate)and
Actin was observed in all cell fractions with an increased
Triton X-100 insoluble (cytoskeletal; pellet) samples, or were left as
expression in the cytoskeletal fraction (Fig. 4, eg., lanes 1 vs 3), crude total protein samples. Untreated cells (Lanes1–3); treated with
but with little detectable difference in distribution with stress. 10mM SB203580 (Lanes 4–6); heat shocked cells (Lanes 7–9); cells
Since the antibodies used to probe for actin detect both treatedwithinhibitorandheatshock(Lanes10–12).Westernblotswere
filamentous and globular actin, one cannot distinguish between sequentially probed with antibodies to pS15-HspB1, pS86-HspB1,
HspB1 and actin; blots were stripped after each probe and prior to
the two species by Western blotting. However, it is generally
the next. Note the increased amount of HspB1 in the cytoskeletal
accepted that the actin associated with the cytoskeletal fraction fraction after HS, as well as the increased amount of phosphorylated
represents F-actin, while the cytosolic fraction represents HspB1.
globular actin [42]. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g004
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 6 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Determining the Interaction(s) of HspB1 and F-actin be non-selectively ‘trappin

Chunk 19:
l fraction fraction after HS, as well as the increased amount of phosphorylated
represents F-actin, while the cytosolic fraction represents HspB1.
globular actin [42]. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g004
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 6 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Determining the Interaction(s) of HspB1 and F-actin be non-selectively ‘trapping’ HspB1, we carried out immunopre-
Pull-Down and Immunoprecipitation assays. While cipitation of HspB1 under the same conditions as noted above.
HspB1 is reported to interact with actin, there has been little TheresultsofrepresentativeHspB1IPexperimentsarepresented
evidence of an interaction with F-actin specifically in a cellular in Fig. 6 C–D, with graphical analyses presented in Fig. 7 C–D.
model (in the absence of overexpression of tagged HspB1). We HspB1 was effectively immunoprecipitated from the cell lysates,
thusinvestigatedwhethertherewasanassociationofHspB1with and there was some increase after HS (Fig. 6C). In the control
F-actin, and if so, whether the phosphorylation state of HspB1 conditionslittleoftheHspB1wasphosphorylated(similartowhat
influenced thisinteraction. wasobservedfortheF-actinpulldown),withincreasesinpHspB1
To specifically isolate F-actin we employed a biotinylated observed after HS and blocked in the presence of the inhibitor.
phalloidinpull downprotocol. Theefficacyandspecificity ofthis Herewealsoobservedactinbeingco-precipitatedwiththeHspB1
approachwasfirstassessedusingsolutionsofpolymerizedF-actin (Fig. 6C). In the cytoskeletal fraction, as with the F-actin-specific
and G-actin. As shown in Fig. 5, the biotinylated phalloidin pull-downs, IP of HspB1 showed that with HS there was a
significantincreaseintheamountofHspB1precipitated(Fig.7D).
specificallypulleddownF-actin(toppanels),withnoG-actinbeing
Thisindicatedaredistributionfromthecytosoltothecytoskeletal
observed intheprecipitated samples (bottompanels).
fraction and concomitantly, also a s

Chunk 20:
F-actin-specific
and G-actin. As shown in Fig. 5, the biotinylated phalloidin pull-downs, IP of HspB1 showed that with HS there was a
significantincreaseintheamountofHspB1precipitated(Fig.7D).
specificallypulleddownF-actin(toppanels),withnoG-actinbeing
Thisindicatedaredistributionfromthecytosoltothecytoskeletal
observed intheprecipitated samples (bottompanels).
fraction and concomitantly, also a significant increase in the
Experimental samples were incubated with biotinylated-phal-
amount of actin co-precipitating with HspB1 (Fig. 7D). pHspB1
loidin followed by precipitation of the captured complexes with
was significantly increased after HS and this increase was
streptavidin-linked magnetic beads. Precipitated fractions were
attenuated bytreatment with theinhibitor(Fig.7D).
then subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted to detect
The ratios of HspB1 and pHspB1 relative to F-actin are
pHspB1, total HspB1 and actin. Although we were primarily
presentedgraphicallyinFig.8(Fig.8A,CforF-actin;Fig.8B,Dfor
interested in the F-actin and HspB1 in the cytoskeletal fractions,
HspB1). With respect to the F-actin pulldown, the ratio of
weinitiallyperformedtheexperimentsonboththetotalcelllysate
HspB1:actin does not differ between the total cell lysate and the
(N=2 experiments) and the cytoskeletal fraction (N=3 experi-
pellet, however it is clear that HS significantly increases the
ments).
fraction of phosphorylated HspB1 precipitated with F-actin
The Western blots of representative phalloidin pull-down
(Fig. 8C). Although the ratio of actin:HspB1 differs between the
experiments are presented in Fig. 6 (panels A, B) while Fig. 7
cell lysates and the pellet, with more actin being associated with
presentsthegraphicalanalysesoftheseexperimentsfromthetotal
HspB1 in the cytoskeletal fraction, again there is a significant
cell lysate (Fig. 7A) and the cytoskeletal fraction (Fig. 7B). As
increase inthephosphorylated fraction ofHspB1 with HS.
showninFig.6A,pulldownofF-actinfromthetotalcell

Chunk 21:
ted in Fig. 6 (panels A, B) while Fig. 7
cell lysates and the pellet, with more actin being associated with
presentsthegraphicalanalysesoftheseexperimentsfromthetotal
HspB1 in the cytoskeletal fraction, again there is a significant
cell lysate (Fig. 7A) and the cytoskeletal fraction (Fig. 7B). As
increase inthephosphorylated fraction ofHspB1 with HS.
showninFig.6A,pulldownofF-actinfromthetotalcellularlysate
The results of the biotinylated pulldowns suggest that not only
captured HspB1 in the control situations and this was increased
doesHspB1directlyinteractwithF-actin,butalsothatarelatively
with HS. In the control situations, little of the HspB1 associated
largefractionofthisHspB1isphosphorylatedinstressedcells.The
with the F-actin was phosphorylated. However, after HS, the
HspB1 IP experiments also point to an interaction with F-actin
fractionofpHspB1associatedwithF-actinincreased,andthiswas
selectively (results from the cytoskeletal fraction), although we
inhibited inthepresenceof SB203580.
cannotruleoutaninteractionofHspB1alsowithnon-filamentous
Phalloidin pulldown from the the TritonX- insoluble (cytoskel-
actin(resultsfromthetotalcelllysates,wherebothF-andG-actin
etalpellet)fraction,whichshouldbeenrichedinF-actin,isshown
should bepresent).
in Fig. 6B. HspB1 was precipitated with the F-actin, although
there were no significant differences between the untreated and
Discussion
HS conditions for either the F-actin or HspB1 (Fig. 7B). In
contrast to the total cellular lysate, much of the HspB1 found in In this study, we investigated the interacton of HspB1 with
the complexes with F-actin was phosphorylated and was signifi- cytoskeletal F-actin and the influence of phosphorylation on this
cantlyincreasedwithHS,andblockedwiththeinhibitor(Fig.7B). association.WedemonstratecellularcolocalizationofHspB1and
In order to provide some measure of specificity, since it was F-actin, as well as a molecular interaction between endogenous
possiblethatlargecomplexesinthecytoskelet

Chunk 22:
es with F-actin was phosphorylated and was signifi- cytoskeletal F-actin and the influence of phosphorylation on this
cantlyincreasedwithHS,andblockedwiththeinhibitor(Fig.7B). association.WedemonstratecellularcolocalizationofHspB1and
In order to provide some measure of specificity, since it was F-actin, as well as a molecular interaction between endogenous
possiblethatlargecomplexesinthecytoskeletalprecipitatescould HspB1 and F-actin under both control and stressed conditions.
OurpulldownandIPresultsindicatethatHspB1andF-actinare
normally associated to some degree, but cell stress results in an
enhanced interaction especially of pHspB1. Overall, our data
providesupport fora direct associationof HspB1 withF-actin.
HspB1 Interactions with Actin
HspB1 has been reported to interact variably with actin
filaments or monomeric actin to influence actin polymerization
and/ordepolymerization[18,20–26].Invitrostudieshavedemon-
strated interactions between actin and recombinant HspB1
[21,29–32]. Similarly, a number of invivo studies have shown
Figure5.SpecificityofthePhalloidinpull-downforF-actin.In
interactionsofHspB1constructswithactinbyimmunoprecipitat-
vitro preparations (2.5 or 5mg) of globular actin (G-actin) and
filamentous actin (F-actin) were prepared using an invitro actin– ing tagged-HspB1, or colocalization at a cellular level of F-actin
binding assay kit (Cytoskeleton) and incubated with 5mg of biotiny- and HspB1, often employing cells overexpressing various con-
lated-phalloidin as detailed in the Methods section. The resulting structs of HspB1 [12,24,27,33,34]. However, a direct interaction
solutionswereseparatedintosupernatant(non-phalloidininteracting) between HspB1 and either G- or F-actin has been questioned
andpull-down(phalloidininteracting)samplesandassayedbyWestern
[26,43].
blotting. Additionally, untreated G- or F-actin samples were also
probed. Note that biotinylated-phalloidin selectively precipitates F- While there have been numerous studies describin

Chunk 23:
a direct interaction
solutionswereseparatedintosupernatant(non-phalloidininteracting) between HspB1 and either G- or F-actin has been questioned
andpull-down(phalloidininteracting)samplesandassayedbyWestern
[26,43].
blotting. Additionally, untreated G- or F-actin samples were also
probed. Note that biotinylated-phalloidin selectively precipitates F- While there have been numerous studies describing an
actin,butnotG-actin,andthatthispull-downisreasonablyefficient. interaction between F-actin and Hspb1 using purified solutions
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g005 ofeach,therehasbeenmuchlessevidenceofsuchinteractionsina
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 7 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure6.HspB1isassociatedwithF-actin.RepresentativeblotsshowingprecipitationofF-actincomplexes(withbiotinylatedphalloidin,A–B)
andIPsofHspB1(C–D)fromtotalcellularlysates(A,C)orthecytoskeletalpelletfraction(B,D).PC12cellsweretreatedasdescribedintheMethods.
Cellcultureswereexposedto10mMSB203580for1hr,afterwhichcultureswereeitherincubatedforanadditional30mins,orstressedwithheat
shockat42uCfor30mins;controlcellswerenottreated.Immediatelyaftertreatments,cellswerecollected,lysedwithactinstabilizationbuffer;
samples were separated for analysis as total cell lysate or further fractionated into the TritonX-100 insoluble cytoskeletal pellet. Samples were
incubatedwithbiotinylated-phalloidinfollowedbyprecipitationofthecapturedcomplexeswithstreptavidin-linkedmagneticbeads.Precipitated
fractions were then subjected to SDS-PAGE and sequentially immunoblotted to detect pHspB1, total HspB1 and actin. Pulldown of F-actin also
capturesHspB1inboththecelllysates(A)andthecytoskeletalfraction(B);similarlytheHspB1IPsalsobringdownactinandthisisenhancedinthe
cytoskeletalfraction.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g006
cellular system. Models for HspB1 regulation of actin filament [37,39]. Using phosphorylation mutants of HspB1, we have
dynamics propose that non-pho

Chunk 24:
 detect pHspB1, total HspB1 and actin. Pulldown of F-actin also
capturesHspB1inboththecelllysates(A)andthecytoskeletalfraction(B);similarlytheHspB1IPsalsobringdownactinandthisisenhancedinthe
cytoskeletalfraction.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g006
cellular system. Models for HspB1 regulation of actin filament [37,39]. Using phosphorylation mutants of HspB1, we have
dynamics propose that non-phosphorylated monomeric HspB1 recently reported that phosphorylation (or more specifically the
inhibitsactinpolymerizationbyactingasanactin-cappingprotein oligomerization) status of HspB1 influences neurite growth and
or by binding to and sequestering G-actin monomers, while colocalization of HspB1 with F-actin in growth cones [36].
phosphorylation reverse this effect and allows for polymerization Howevertheinfluenceofphosphorylationwasnotclearcutasthat
or filament elongation [18,21]. observed in other cellular models. For example, HspB1-EE (fully
phosphorylated and unable to be dephosphorylated) resulted in
Role of HspB1 and Actin Interactions in Unstressed Cells the lowest amount of total neurite growth, which could be
HspB1 interactions with actin and other cytoskeletal elements consistent with decreased actin polymerization. In contrast, the
play a role in the dynamic regulation of the cytoskeleton that non-phosphorylatable construct (HspB1-AA) showed similar
underlies cellular behavior.For example,HspB1 has beenshown growthtotheWTHspB1withamorepatchycolocalizationwith
to be required for cellular migration in a variety of cell types: F-actin, an effect that is difficult to explain based on the models
leukocytes,smoothmuscle,neutrophilsandfibroblasts[44–47].Its that suggested that nonphosphorylated HspB1 inhibits F-actin
roleinmigrationisviaregulationofactinfilamentpolymerization polymerization via sequestration of actin monomers [21], or
at the leading edge of the cell, as well as in focal adhesions that capping of the barbed ends of actin filaments [50]. Unlike
connect t

Chunk 25:
n based on the models
leukocytes,smoothmuscle,neutrophilsandfibroblasts[44–47].Its that suggested that nonphosphorylated HspB1 inhibits F-actin
roleinmigrationisviaregulationofactinfilamentpolymerization polymerization via sequestration of actin monomers [21], or
at the leading edge of the cell, as well as in focal adhesions that capping of the barbed ends of actin filaments [50]. Unlike
connect the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. In experiments with purified HspB1 and actin, the situation in the
addition to influencing cell migration, HspB1 also plays a role in cellularcontextismuchmorecomplex,withHspB1beingableto
axonalgrowthfromneurons[36,37,39,48,49].Wehavesuggested be rapidly phosphorylated and dephosphorylated in response to
that the regulation of actin dynamics by HspB1 is important in thechanging cellular environment.
axonal growth from primary neurons, and have previously The current study was undertaken as part of our efforts to
demonstrated colocalization of HspB1 with F-actin and tubulin understand interactions of actin and HspB1 in a cellular context
in lamellopodia, filopodia and focal contacts at the earliest stages usingamodelsystemamenabletobiochemicalapproaches.Here
ofsensoryneuritegrowthandinmatureaxonsandgrowthcones in the normal cells, we observed that the cellular distribution of
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 8 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure7.DensitometricanalysesoftheamountsofF-actinandHspB1intheprecipitatedcomplexes.Westernblotswerescannedand
densitometricanalysisofbandscarriedoutusingImageJandacalibratedgrayscalestandard.ThebarsarethemeanROD(6SEM)ofpairedvalues
forActin,HspB1(Hsp),pS86-HspB1(S86)andpS15-HspB1(S15)fromeachof3separateexperimentsforthecytoskeletalfractionsamples(pellet)and
from2separateexperimentsfortotalcelllysates.PanelA–Phalloidinpulldownfromtotalcelllysates;B–Phalloidinpulldownfromthecytoskeletal
fraction; C – HspB1 IP from total cell lysates; D – Hs

Chunk 26:
doutusingImageJandacalibratedgrayscalestandard.ThebarsarethemeanROD(6SEM)ofpairedvalues
forActin,HspB1(Hsp),pS86-HspB1(S86)andpS15-HspB1(S15)fromeachof3separateexperimentsforthecytoskeletalfractionsamples(pellet)and
from2separateexperimentsfortotalcelllysates.PanelA–Phalloidinpulldownfromtotalcelllysates;B–Phalloidinpulldownfromthecytoskeletal
fraction; C – HspB1 IP from total cell lysates; D – HspB1 IP from the cytoskeletal fraction. Norm – control; HS – Heat Shock; HS+SB – Heat
shock+SB203580.**p,0.01;***p,0.001.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g007
HspB1, pHspB1 and F-actin in lamellopodia and at the leading dependent on the ability of HspB1 to bind to denatured actin
edges of cells is consistent with a role in normal cellular filaments,preventingtheiraggregationandfacilitatingreformation
attachment, spreading and cellular motility (Fig. 1). Specific [58].Intheactin-cappingmodel,HspB1wasthoughttocapactin
isolation of F-actin from total cell lysates or the cytoskeletal filamentsasanonphosphorylatedmonomerwithphosphorylation
fractionalsoprecipitatedHspB1.Non-phosphorylatedHspB1was resulting in dissociation from the actin filament and elongation
observedinacomplexwithF-actininthecontrolcells,aswasthe [23,44,50,57,59]. The actin sequestering model suggests that
relativelysmallfractionofphosphorylatedHspB1.Inthissituation nonphosphorylated HspB1 binds actin monomers resulting in an
the association of HspB1 and F-actin likely plays a role in the increase in the G-actin pool and a subsequent decrease in actin
normaladhesionandmotilityofthesePC12cells,withphosphor- filamentlevels;uponphosphorylationHspB1dissociatesfromthe
ylated HspB1 potentially supporting actin polymerization needed actinmonomers,whicharethenavailableforfilamentelongation
for cellular adhesionand migration[47,51]. [21]. A recent in vitro study provides support for a model with
HspB1bindingalongthelengthsofactinfilaments,butnotacting
Role of HspB1 in Cytoskeletal Protection as a cappingprotein [30].
Pa

Chunk 27:
ls;uponphosphorylationHspB1dissociatesfromthe
ylated HspB1 potentially supporting actin polymerization needed actinmonomers,whicharethenavailableforfilamentelongation
for cellular adhesionand migration[47,51]. [21]. A recent in vitro study provides support for a model with
HspB1bindingalongthelengthsofactinfilaments,butnotacting
Role of HspB1 in Cytoskeletal Protection as a cappingprotein [30].
Part of HspB1’s protective role in stressed cells has been HspB1 is known to interact directly with actin invitro as
attributedtoitsinteractionswithactin,resultinginincreasedactin described above, but whether this is also true in cells has been
filamentstability.DuringvariousstressesHspB1hasbeenreported unclear.Whileanumberofstudieshaveshownco-localizationof
to increase the stability of the actin cytoskeleton effectively HspB1withF-actinandredistributionofbothaftervariousstimuli
preventingactinfragmentation[52–56].HspB1hasbeenreported using confocal microscopy, few have concomitantly studied
tointeractwithactinasabarbedendactincappingprotein[57], whether there is a biochemical association with F-actin. Further-
and its actions in protecting the actin filament cytoskeleton have more, the majority of these investigations have employed cells in
beenattributedtothisactincappingability[52].However,ithas which HspB1 had been overexpressed [23,24,27,47,60,61].
also been suggested that HspB1 impairs actin filament polymer- Although there has been little evidence for a direct association
ization by sequestering actin monomers rather than by capping of HspB1 and actin in vivo, recent studies have shown that actin
[21].ProtectionoftheactincytoskeletonbyHspB1appearstobe existsincomplexesofimmunoprecipitatedHspB1[24,62].Oneof
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 9 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure8.ChangesintherelativeamountsoftheassociationofF-actinandHspB1.DensitometricdataofF-actinandHspB1expressionin
pulldowns presented as ratios of Hsp

Chunk 28:
ave shown that actin
[21].ProtectionoftheactincytoskeletonbyHspB1appearstobe existsincomplexesofimmunoprecipitatedHspB1[24,62].Oneof
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 9 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
Figure8.ChangesintherelativeamountsoftheassociationofF-actinandHspB1.DensitometricdataofF-actinandHspB1expressionin
pulldowns presented as ratios of HspB1:F-actin or Actin:HspB1, as well as the pHspB1:F-actin or pHspB1:HspB1. Panel A - ratios for Phalloidin
pulldownfromtotalcelllysate;B-ratiosforHspB1IPfromtotalcelllysate;C-ratiosforPhalloidinpulldownfromcytoskeletalfraction(pellet);D–
ratiosforHspB1fromthecytoskeletalfraction.**p,0.01.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068978.g008
these demonstrated that actin could be interacting with HspB1 HspB1andF-actin.UnderallconditionsHspB1interactedwithF-
basedonimmunoprecipitationofoverexpressedtaggedfishHspB1 actinwithseeminglyhighselectivity,baseduponourapproachof
frommammaliancells[24].Inthisstudy,theinteractionbetween performing both direct precipitation of F-actin and the reverse
fHspB1andactinafterHSwasobservedtodecreaseby3 hrs,but approachofHspB1IP.OurresultsshowthatHspB1isfoundina
then increased by 24hrs. In our study, we were primarily complexwith F-actinbothin non-phosphorylated andphosphor-
interested in the response of PC12 cells to a HS over the short ylated forms, with an increased association of pHspB1 with actin
term when phosphorylation of HspB1 increases rapidly; in PC12 afterstress.Inthenormalcells,thecellulardistributionofHspB1,
cellsinresponsetoHS,pHspisdetectableasearlyas5 minaftera pHspB1 and F-actin is consistent with a role in cellular motility,
15min HS, with a maximum reached by 1 hr [41]. Unlike the being present in lamellopodia and at the leading edges of cells
formerstudy,weobservedassociationofHspB1withF-actininthe (Fig. 1). Upon HS, there was a relatively rapid (within 30min)
controlcellsandanincreasedassociationofpHspB1withF-actin reorganizationofthecytos

Chunk 29:
minaftera pHspB1 and F-actin is consistent with a role in cellular motility,
15min HS, with a maximum reached by 1 hr [41]. Unlike the being present in lamellopodia and at the leading edges of cells
formerstudy,weobservedassociationofHspB1withF-actininthe (Fig. 1). Upon HS, there was a relatively rapid (within 30min)
controlcellsandanincreasedassociationofpHspB1withF-actin reorganizationofthecytoskeletonaccompaniedbyaredistibution
immediately after thetermination oftheHS. andincreasedphosphorylationofHspB1(Fig.2).Thisisevidentat
An elegant study by Jia and colleagues quite clearly demon- the level of cellular localization (Figs 1–3) and also at the
strates that endogenous HspB1 interacts not only with actin but biochemical level (Figs 4, 6–8). Specific isolation of F-actin from
also with several other cytoskeletal proteins and actin-binding total cell lysates or the cytoskeletal fraction also precipitated
proteins [62]. In our experiments, while we did not exhaustively HspB1. Non-phosphorylated HspB1 was observed in a complex
investigate the presence of other proteins in the precipitated with F-actin in both the control and stressed cells. A relatively
complexes, we did not detect the presence of tubulin, neurofila- small fraction of HspB1 is phosphorylated in the control cells. In
ment,nestinorDaxx(datanotshown),suggestingthatinteractions this situation according to the proposed models, phosphorylated
of HspB1 andthecytoskeleton mayvaryindifferent cells. HspB1 would support actin polymerization needed for cellular
Inourinvestigation,weperformedpull-downandimmunopre- adhesion and migration [47,51]. After HS there is an increased
cipitation assays in order to determine any interaction between phosphorylation and redistribution of HspB1 to the cytoskeletal
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 10 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
fraction. It isclear thata significantfractionof theHspB1 pulled detected as colocalized with F-act

Chunk 30:
on and migration [47,51]. After HS there is an increased
cipitation assays in order to determine any interaction between phosphorylation and redistribution of HspB1 to the cytoskeletal
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 10 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
fraction. It isclear thata significantfractionof theHspB1 pulled detected as colocalized with F-actin. HS results in the phosphor-
down with F-actin is phosphorylated on both the S15 and S86 ylation of HspB1, which also colocalizes with F-actin and is
sites,andthatthisisattenuatedbythepresenceofthep38MAPK significantly increased in association with F-actin after stress.
inhibitor, SB203580. The increase in phosphorylation and These results directly demonstrate that HspB1 interacts with F-
increased association with F-actin is consistent with the role of actin and that both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated
HspB1 in protecting actin filaments by inhibiting actin fragmen- HspB1 are foundtobepresent inF-actin complexes.
tation[23,53].Thereversepull-downexperimentsprovidesimilar
results. Immunoprecipitation of HspB1 also brings down actin Supporting Information
and,inthecytoskeletalpelletatleast,itishighlylikelythatthisis
also F-actin. With stress there is an increased amount of HspB1 FigureS1 Densitometricanalysesofrelativegraylevels
precipitated, and an apparent corresponding increase in the ofPC12cellICCdemonstratingthesignificantincrease
amount of actin, although ratio of actin:HspB1 does not differ in pSer15-HspB1 and pSer86-HspB1 with heat shock.
between conditions (Fig.7 and8). Relative densitometric quantification and statistical analyses of
Theseresultsarethefirstthatweareawareoftocombineboth cells imaged by confocal microscopy analyzed using ImageJ.
cellular and molecular approaches to show cellular localization Values expressed are the average grey values for pSer15-HspB1,
andadirectdemonstrationofaninteractionbetweenendogenous pSer86-HspB1 and total HspB1 (+/

Chunk 31:
and8). Relative densitometric quantification and statistical analyses of
Theseresultsarethefirstthatweareawareoftocombineboth cells imaged by confocal microscopy analyzed using ImageJ.
cellular and molecular approaches to show cellular localization Values expressed are the average grey values for pSer15-HspB1,
andadirectdemonstrationofaninteractionbetweenendogenous pSer86-HspB1 and total HspB1 (+/2 S.E.M., n=100). **:
HspB1 and F-actin, using a method that specifically isolates P,0.01;***: P,0.001
endogenous F-actin. However, based upon the reports of others, (TIF)
we also are aware that despite our evidence that we cannot rule
out some other indirect interactor that plays a role in linking the Acknowledgments
response ofthe cytoskeletontoHspB1.
We thank members of the Mearow lab (especially F. Nafar and B.
Williams) for their technical support and assistance in the course of this
Conclusions
study.
HspB1isassociatedwiththeactincytoskeletoninbothcontrol
and heat-shocked cells. HspB1 phosphorylated on both the S15
Author Contributions
and S86 sites is detectable by immunocytochemistry in normal
cells and this is increased after HS, but attenuated by treatment Conceived and designed the experiments: JPC KM. Performed the
with the p38 MAPK inihibitor. HspB1 is found distributed experiments: JPC. Analyzed the data: JPC KM. Contributed reagents/
primarily throughout the cytoplasm in the normal cells and is materials/analysistools:JPCKM.Wrotethepaper:JPCKM.
redistributed after HS to the cytoskeletal fraction, where it is
References
1. WatsonDF,NachtmanFN,KunclRW,GriffinJW(1994)Alteredneurofila- 14. Landry J, Lambert H, Zhou M, Lavoie JN, Hickey E, et al. (1992) Human
mentphosphorylationandbetatubulinisotypesinCharcot-Marie-Toothdisease HSP27 is phosphorylated at serines 78 and 82 by heat shock and mitogen-
type1.Neurology44:2383–2387. activatedkinasesthatrecognizethesameaminoacidmotifasS6kinaseII.JBiol
2. HsiaoVC,TianR,LongH,DerPerngM,BrennerM,etal.(2005)Alexander- Chem26

Chunk 32:
teredneurofila- 14. Landry J, Lambert H, Zhou M, Lavoie JN, Hickey E, et al. (1992) Human
mentphosphorylationandbetatubulinisotypesinCharcot-Marie-Toothdisease HSP27 is phosphorylated at serines 78 and 82 by heat shock and mitogen-
type1.Neurology44:2383–2387. activatedkinasesthatrecognizethesameaminoacidmotifasS6kinaseII.JBiol
2. HsiaoVC,TianR,LongH,DerPerngM,BrennerM,etal.(2005)Alexander- Chem267:794–803.
disease mutation of GFAP causes filament disorganization and decreased 15. EhrnspergerM,LilieH,GaestelM,BuchnerJ(1999)ThedynamicsofHsp25
solubilityofGFAP.JournalofCellScience118:2057–2065. quaternarystructure.Structureandfunctionofdifferentoligomericspecies.JBiol
3. FabriziGM,CavallaroT,AngiariC,CabriniI,TaioliF,etal.(2007)Charcot– Chem274:14867–14874.
Marie–Toothdiseasetype2E,adisorderofthecytoskeleton.Brain130:394– 16. Lambert H, Charette SJ, Bernier AF, Guimond A, Landry J (1999) HSP27
403. multimerizationmediatedbyphosphorylation-sensitiveintermolecularinterac-
4. Nollen EAA, Kabakov AE, Brunsting JF, Kanon B, Ho¨hfeld J, et al. (2001) tionsattheaminoterminus.JBiolChem274:9378–9385.
ModulationofinVivoHSP70ChaperoneActivitybyHipandBag-1.Journalof 17. VanMontfortRL,BashaE,FriedrichKL,SlingsbyC,VierlingE(2001)Crystal
BiologicalChemistry276:4677–4682. structureandassemblyofaeukaryoticsmallheatshockprotein.NatStructBiol
5. Okada M, Hatakeyama T, Itoh H, Tokuta N, Tokumitsu H, et al. (2004) 8:1025–1030.
S100A1IsaNovelMolecularChaperoneandaMemberoftheHsp70/Hsp90 18. Li T, Ying L, Wang H, Li N, Fu W, et al. (2012) Microcystin-LR induces
MultichaperoneComplex.JournalofBiologicalChemistry279:4221–4233. ceramide to regulate PP2A and destabilize cytoskeleton in HEK293 cells.
6. RouseJ,CohenP,TrigonS,MorangeM,Alonso-LlamazaresA,etal.(1994)A ToxicolSci128:147–157.
novelkinasecascadetriggeredbystressandheatshockthatstimulatesMAPKAP 19. QuinlanR(2002)Cytoskeletalcompetencerequiresproteinchaperones.Prog
kinase-2andphosphorylationofthesmallheatshockproteins.Cell78:1027– MolSub

Chunk 33:
calChemistry279:4221–4233. ceramide to regulate PP2A and destabilize cytoskeleton in HEK293 cells.
6. RouseJ,CohenP,TrigonS,MorangeM,Alonso-LlamazaresA,etal.(1994)A ToxicolSci128:147–157.
novelkinasecascadetriggeredbystressandheatshockthatstimulatesMAPKAP 19. QuinlanR(2002)Cytoskeletalcompetencerequiresproteinchaperones.Prog
kinase-2andphosphorylationofthesmallheatshockproteins.Cell78:1027– MolSubcellBiol28:219–233.
1037. 20. Wettstein G, Bellaye PS, Micheau O, Bonniaud P (2012) Small heat shock
7. KostenkoS,MoensU(2009)Heatshockprotein27phosphorylation:kinases, proteins and the cytoskeleton: an essential interplay for cell integrity?
phosphatases,functionsandpathology.CellMolLifeSci66:3289–3307. IntJBiochemCellBiol44:1680–1686.
8. EhrnspergerM,GraberS,GaestelM,BuchnerJ(1997)Bindingofnon-native 21. DuringRL,GibsonBG,LiW,BishaiEA,SidhuGS,etal.(2007)Anthraxlethal
proteintoHsp25duringheatshockcreatesareservoiroffoldingintermediates toxin paralyzes actin-based motility by blocking Hsp27 phosphorylation.
forreactivation.EMBOJ16:221–229. EMBOJ26:2240–2250.
9. LeeGJ,RosemanAM,SaibilHR,VierlingE(1997)Asmallheatshockprotein 22. Guay J, Lambert H, Gingras-Breton G, Lavoie JN, Huot J, et al. (1997)
stablybindsheat-denaturedmodelsubstratesandcanmaintainasubstrateina Regulationofactinfilamentdynamicsbyp38mapkinase-mediatedphosphor-
folding-competentstate.EMBOJ16:659–671. ylationofheatshockprotein27.JournalofCellScience110:357–368.
10. MehlenP,ArrigoAP(1994)Theserum-inducedphosphorylationofmammalian 23. LavoieJN,LambertH,HickeyE,WeberLA,LandryJ(1995)Modulationof
hsp27 correlates with changes in its intracellular localization and levels of cellularthermoresistanceandactinfilamentstabilityaccompaniesphosphory-
oligomerization.EurJBiochem221:327–334. lation-inducedchangesintheoligomericstructureofheatshockprotein27.Mol
11. Rogalla T, Ehrnsperger M, Preville X, Kotlyarov A, LutschG, etal. (1999) CellBiol15:505–516.
Regulation of Hsp27 oligomerization, chaperone function, and protecti

Chunk 34:
nges in its intracellular localization and levels of cellularthermoresistanceandactinfilamentstabilityaccompaniesphosphory-
oligomerization.EurJBiochem221:327–334. lation-inducedchangesintheoligomericstructureofheatshockprotein27.Mol
11. Rogalla T, Ehrnsperger M, Preville X, Kotlyarov A, LutschG, etal. (1999) CellBiol15:505–516.
Regulation of Hsp27 oligomerization, chaperone function, and protective 24. DoshiBM,HightowerLE,LeeJ(2009)TheroleofHsp27andactininthe
activityagainstoxidativestress/tumornecrosisfactoralphabyphosphorylation. regulationofmovementinhumancancercellsrespondingtoheatshock.Cell
274:18947–18956. StressChaperones14:445–457.
12. BryantsevAL,KurchashovaSY,GolyshevSA,PolyakovVY,WunderinkHF,et 25. SchneiderGB,HamanoH,CooperLF(1998)Invivoevaluationofhsp27asan
al. (2007) Regulation of stress-induced intracellular sorting and chaperone inhibitor of actin polymerization: hsp27 limits actin stress fiber and focal
functionofHsp27(HspB1)inmammaliancells.BiochemJ407:407–417. adhesionformationafterheatshock.JCellPhysiol177:575–584.
13. StokoeD,EngelK,CampbellDG,CohenP,GaestelM(1992)Identificationof 26. Seit-NebiAS,DatskevichP,GusevNB(2013)Commentaryonpaper:Small
MAPKAPkinase2asamajorenzymeresponsibleforthephosphorylationofthe heatshockproteinsandthecytoskeleton:anessentialinterplayforcellintegrity?
smallmammalianheatshockproteins.FEBSLett313:307–313. (Wettsteinetal.).IntJBiochemCellBiol45:344–346.
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 11 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---

HspB1InteractionswithF-Actin
27. Landry J, Huot J (1995) Modulation of actin dynamics during stress and 47. PichonS,BryckaertM,BerrouE(2004)Controlofactindynamicsbyp38MAP
physiologicalstimulationbyasignalingpathwayinvolvingp38MAPkinaseand kinase-Hsp27distributioninthelamellipodiumofsmoothmusclecells.JCell
heat-shockprotein27.BiochemCellBiol73:703–707. Sci117:2569–2577.
28. DoshiBM,HightowerLE,LeeJ(2010)HSPB1,actinfilamentdynamics,and 48. Benn SC, Perrelet D, Kato AC, Scholz J, Decost

Chunk 35:
ring stress and 47. PichonS,BryckaertM,BerrouE(2004)Controlofactindynamicsbyp38MAP
physiologicalstimulationbyasignalingpathwayinvolvingp38MAPkinaseand kinase-Hsp27distributioninthelamellipodiumofsmoothmusclecells.JCell
heat-shockprotein27.BiochemCellBiol73:703–707. Sci117:2569–2577.
28. DoshiBM,HightowerLE,LeeJ(2010)HSPB1,actinfilamentdynamics,and 48. Benn SC, Perrelet D, Kato AC, Scholz J, Decosterd I, et al. (2002) Hsp27
agingcells.AnnNYAcadSci1197:76–84. upregulation and phosphorylation is required for injured sensory and motor
29. Datskevich PN, Mymrikov EV, Gusev NB (2012) Utilization of fluorescent neuronsurvival.36:45–56.
chimeras for investigation of heterooligomeric complexes formed by human 49. CostiganM,MannionRJ,KendallG,LewisSE,CampagnaJA,etal.(1998)
smallheatshockproteins.Biochimie94:1794–1804. Heatshockprotein27:developmentalregulationandexpressionafterperipheral
30. GraceffaP(2011)Hsp27-actininteraction.BiochemResInt2011:901572. nerveinjury.JNeurosci18:5891–5900.
31. MymrikovEV,Seit-NebiAS,GusevNB(2012)Heterooligomericcomplexesof 50. Benndorf R, Hayess K, Ryazantsev S, Wieske M, Behlke J, et al. (1994)
humansmallheatshockproteins.CellStressChaperones17:157–169. Phosphorylationandsupramolecularorganizationofmurinesmallheatshock
32. PivovarovaAV,ChebotarevaNA,ChernikIS,GusevNB,LevitskyDI(2007) proteinHSP25abolishitsactinpolymerization-inhibitingactivity.JBiolChem
SmallheatshockproteinHsp27preventsheat-inducedaggregationofF-actinby 269:20780–20784.
formingsolublecomplexeswithdenaturedactin.FEBSJ274:5937–5948. 51. Rousseau S, Houle F, Kotanides H, Witte L, Waltenberger J, et al. (2000)
33. HuotJ,HouleF,SpitzDR,LandryJ(1996)HSP27phosphorylation-mediated Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-driven actin-based motility is
resistanceagainstactinfragmentationandcelldeathinducedbyoxidativestress. mediated by VEGFR2 and requires concerted activation of stress-activated
CancerRes56:273–279. proteinkinase2(SAPK2/p38)andgeldanamycin-sensitivephosphorylationof

Chunk 36:
nberger J, et al. (2000)
33. HuotJ,HouleF,SpitzDR,LandryJ(1996)HSP27phosphorylation-mediated Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-driven actin-based motility is
resistanceagainstactinfragmentationandcelldeathinducedbyoxidativestress. mediated by VEGFR2 and requires concerted activation of stress-activated
CancerRes56:273–279. proteinkinase2(SAPK2/p38)andgeldanamycin-sensitivephosphorylationof
34. VerschuureP,CroesY,vandenIPR,QuinlanRA,deJongWW,etal.(2002) focaladhesionkinase.JBiolChem275:10661–10672.
Translocation of small heat shock proteins to the actin cytoskeleton upon 52. Lavoie JN, Hickey E, Weber LA, Landry J (1993) Modulation of actin
proteasomalinhibition.JMolCellCardiol34:117–128. microfilamentdynamicsandfluidphasepinocytosisbyphosphorylationofheat
35. SunY,MengGM,GuoZL,XuLH(2011)Regulationofheatshockprotein27 shockprotein27.JBiolChem268:24210–24214.
phosphorylationduringmicrocystin-LR-inducedcytoskeletalreorganizationina
53. Schafer C, Clapp P, Welsh MJ, Benndorf R, Williams JA (1999) HSP27
humanlivercellline.ToxicolLett207:270–277.
expressionregulatesCCK-inducedchangesoftheactincytoskeletoninCHO-
36. WilliamsKL,MearowKM(2011)Phosphorylationstatusofheatshockprotein
CCK-Acells.AmJPhysiol277:C1032–1043.
27 influences neurite growth in adult dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons
54. VanWhySK,MannAS,ArditoT,ThulinG,FerrisS,etal.(2003)Hsp27
invitro.JNeurosciRes89:1160–1172.
associateswithactinandlimitsinjuryinenergydepletedrenalepithelia.JAm
37. Williams KL, Rahimtula M, Mearow KM (2006) Heat shock protein 27 is
SocNephrol14:98–106.
involved in neurite extension and branching of dorsal root ganglion neurons
55. LeeJH,SunD,ChoKJ,KimMS,HongMH,etal.(2007)Overexpressionof
invitro.JNeurosciRes84:716–723.
human27kDaheatshockproteininlaryngealcancercellsconferschemore-
38. GreeneLA,TischlerAS(1976)Establishmentofanoradrenergicclonallineof
sistanceassociatedwithcellgrowthdelay.JCancerResClinOncol133:37–46.
ratadrenalpheochromocytomacellswhichrespondtonervegrowthfa

Chunk 37:
nd branching of dorsal root ganglion neurons
55. LeeJH,SunD,ChoKJ,KimMS,HongMH,etal.(2007)Overexpressionof
invitro.JNeurosciRes84:716–723.
human27kDaheatshockproteininlaryngealcancercellsconferschemore-
38. GreeneLA,TischlerAS(1976)Establishmentofanoradrenergicclonallineof
sistanceassociatedwithcellgrowthdelay.JCancerResClinOncol133:37–46.
ratadrenalpheochromocytomacellswhichrespondtonervegrowthfactor.Proc
56. VigilanzaP,AquilanoK,RotilioG,CirioloMR(2008)Transientcytoskeletal
NatlAcadSciUSA73:2424–2428.
alterationsafterSOD1depletioninneuroblastomacells.CellMolLifeSci65:
39. WilliamsKL,RahimtulaM,MearowKM(2005)Hsp27andaxonalgrowthin
991–1004.
adultsensoryneuronsinvitro.BMCNeurosci6:24.
40. FulgaTA,Elson-SchwabI,KhuranaV,SteinhilbML,SpiresTL,etal.(2007) 57. MironT,VancompernolleK,VandekerckhoveJ,WilchekM,GeigerB(1991)A
AbnormalbundlingandaccumulationofF-actinmediatestau-inducedneuronal 25-kD inhibitor of actin polymerization is a low molecular mass heat shock
degenerationinvivo.NatCellBiol9:139–148. protein.JCellBiol114:255–261.
41. MearowKM,DodgeME,RahimtulaM,YegappanC(2002)Stress-mediated 58. PivovarovaAV,MikhailovaVV,ChernikIS,ChebotarevaNA,LevitskyDI,et
signalinginPC12cells-theroleofthesmallheatshockprotein,Hsp27,andAkt al.(2005)Effectsofsmallheatshockproteinsonthethermaldenaturationand
in protecting cells from heat stress and nerve growth factor withdrawal. aggregationofF-actin.BiochemBiophysResCommun331:1548–1553.
JNeurochem83:452–462. 59. Guay J, Lambert H, Gingras-Breton G, Lavoie JN, Huot J, et al. (1997)
42. KobayashiR,TawataM,FieldJB(1982)Actinintriton-insolublecytoskeleton Regulationofactinfilamentdynamicsbyp38mapkinase-mediatedphosphor-
ofthyroid.Metabolism31:133–138. ylationofheatshockprotein27.JCellSci110(Pt3):357–368.
43. MymrikovEV,Seit-NebiAS,GusevNB(2011)LargePotentialsofSmallHeat 60. BryantsevAL,LoktionovaSA,IlyinskayaOP,TararakEM,KampingaHH,et
ShockProteins.PhysiologicalReviews91:1123–1159. al.(2002)Distribution,phosphorylation,andactivitiesofHsp2

Chunk 38:
oskeleton Regulationofactinfilamentdynamicsbyp38mapkinase-mediatedphosphor-
ofthyroid.Metabolism31:133–138. ylationofheatshockprotein27.JCellSci110(Pt3):357–368.
43. MymrikovEV,Seit-NebiAS,GusevNB(2011)LargePotentialsofSmallHeat 60. BryantsevAL,LoktionovaSA,IlyinskayaOP,TararakEM,KampingaHH,et
ShockProteins.PhysiologicalReviews91:1123–1159. al.(2002)Distribution,phosphorylation,andactivitiesofHsp25inheat-stressed
44. LandryJ,HuotJ(1999)Regulationofactindynamicsbystress-activatedprotein H9c2myoblasts:afunctionallinktocytoprotection.CellStressChaperones7:
kinase2(SAPK2)-dependentphosphorylationofheat-shockproteinof27kDa 146–155.
(Hsp27).BiochemSocSymp64:79–89. 61. Piotrowicz RS, Hickey E, Levin EG (1998) Heat shock protein 27kDa
45. JogNR,JalaVR,WardRA,RaneMJ,HaribabuB,etal.(2007)Heatshock expressionandphosphorylationregulatesendothelialcellmigration.FASEBJ
protein 27 regulates neutrophil chemotaxis and exocytosis through two 12:1481–1490.
independentmechanisms.JImmunol178:2421–2428. 62. Jia Y, WuSL,Isenberg JS,Dai S, Sipes JM,et al. (2010) Thiolutin inhibits
46. NomuraN,NomuraM,SugiyamaK,HamadaJ(2007)Phorbol12-myristate endothelialcelladhesionbyperturbingHsp27interactionswithcomponentsof
13-acetate (PMA)-induced migration of glioblastoma cells is mediated via the actin and intermediate filament cytoskeleton. Cell Stress Chaperones 15:
p38MAPK/Hsp27pathway.BiochemPharmacol74:690–701. 165–181.
PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 12 July2013 | Volume 8 | Issue 7 | e68978

---PAGE BREAK---



