Chunk 1:
DDoowwnnllooaaddeedd ffrroomm jjnnmm..ssnnmmjjoouurrnnaallss..oorrgg bbyy UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff TTuurrkkuu oonn JJuunnee 44,, 22001144.. FFoorr ppeerrssoonnaall uussee oonnllyy..
Imaging Approaches to Parkinson Disease
David J. Brooks
J Nucl Med. 2010;51:596-609.
Doi: 10.2967/jnumed.108.059998
This article and updated information are available at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/content/51/4/596
Information about reproducing figures, tables, or other portions of this article can be found online at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/site/misc/permission.xhtml
Information about subscriptions to JNM can be found at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/site/subscriptions/online.xhtml
The Journal of Nuclear Medicine is published monthly.
SNMMI | Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging
1850 Samuel Morse Drive, Reston, VA 20190.
(Print ISSN: 0161-5505, Online ISSN: 2159-662X)
© Copyright 2010 SNMMI; all rights reserved.

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
R E V I E W A R T I C L E
Imaging Approaches to Parkinson Disease
DavidJ.Brooks
MRCClinicalSciencesCentreandDivisionofNeuroscienceandMentalHealth,FacultyofMedicine,ImperialCollege,
HammersmithHospital,London,UnitedKingdom
Parkinson disease (PD) is associated with nigral degeneration ated with exogenous agents such as dopamine receptor–
andstriataldopaminedeficiency.Demonstratingmidbrainstruc- blocking drugs. These conditions are not associated with
tural abnormalities with transcranial sonography or diffusion-
nigraldegenerationorstriataldopamine deficiency. Inupto
weightedMRIorshowingstriataldopamineterminaldysfunction
15% of cases labeled as early PD by investigators, imaging
withPETorSPECTsupportsthediagnosisandrationalizesthe
hasshownnormaldopamineterminalfunctionsuggestiveof
useofdopaminergicmedications.InatypicalPDvariants,trans-
cranial sonography can detect striatal hyperechogenicity, and analternativediagnosis(3,4).Giventhisstatistic,theab

Chunk 2:
y. Inupto
weightedMRIorshowingstriataldopamineterminaldysfunction
15% of cases labeled as early PD by investigators, imaging
withPETorSPECTsupportsthediagnosisandrationalizesthe
hasshownnormaldopamineterminalfunctionsuggestiveof
useofdopaminergicmedications.InatypicalPDvariants,trans-
cranial sonography can detect striatal hyperechogenicity, and analternativediagnosis(3,4).Giventhisstatistic,theability
diffusion-weightedimagingcandetectincreasedputamenwater to noninvasively detect altered nigral structure or striatal
diffusion, whereas 18F-FDG PET revealsreduced lentiformnu- dopamine terminal function potentially provides valuable
cleusglucosemetabolism.PETandSPECTcandetectchanges tools that can help increase diagnostic specificity for
instriataldopaminelevelsafterlevodopaadministrationandre-
dopamine-deficient parkinsonian syndromes and rationalize
latethesetomotorresponses.Lossofcorticaldopaminergicand
management decisions at initial stages of disease.
cholinergicfunctionispresentindementedPDand,onoccasion,
In addition, there are atypical parkinsonian disorders
amyloiddepositscanbedetected.Lossofcardiacsympathetic
innervationcanbesensitivelydetectedinPDwith18F-dopamine associated with striatal dopamine deficiency but with non–
PETor123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine SPECT. Finally, PET can Lewy body pathologies such as multiple-system atrophy,
detect widespread brain inflammation in PD. This review dis- progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degenera-
cussestheroleofstructuralandfunctionalimagingfordiagnos- tion.Theaccuracyofdiagnosisoftheseconditionsimproves
ingandmanagingdifferentparkinsoniansyndromes.
with disease duration as their atypical features become
KeyWords:PET;SPECT;magneticresonanceimaging;trans- evident, but early on they can be difficult to discriminate
cranialsonography;Parkinson’sdisease;dementia
fromidiopathicPDonclinicalgrounds.Vascularparkinson-
JNuclMed2010;51:596–609 ismcanalsomimicPD,thoughvascularparkinsonismtends
DOI:10.2967/jnumed.108

Chunk 3:
nagingdifferentparkinsoniansyndromes.
with disease duration as their atypical features become
KeyWords:PET;SPECT;magneticresonanceimaging;trans- evident, but early on they can be difficult to discriminate
cranialsonography;Parkinson’sdisease;dementia
fromidiopathicPDonclinicalgrounds.Vascularparkinson-
JNuclMed2010;51:596–609 ismcanalsomimicPD,thoughvascularparkinsonismtends
DOI:10.2967/jnumed.108.059998
tobepoorly responsive to levodopaand ischaracteristically
associated with lower-body parkinsonism and gait apraxia.
Nonmotor complications ofPDcan causegreater impair-
T ment of quality of life than does the motor disability.
Dementia is 2–6 times more common in PD than in age-
hedefinitivediagnosisofidiopathicParkinsondisease
matched controlsand isassociatedwithcortical Lewy body
(PD)requireshistologicdemonstrationofintraneuronalLewy
diseaseand,onoccasion,concomitantAlzheimerpathology.
body inclusions in the substantia nigra compacta, and such
DementiawithLewybodies(DLB),likeAlzheimerdisease,
demonstration is clearly impractical during life. The nigro-
is associated with impaired recall, speech, and perceptual
striatalprojectionlossthatcharacterizesPDisassociatedwith
difficulties but in addition is characterized by rigidity,
striatal dopamine deficiency targeting the posterior putamen.
fluctuating confusion, psychosis, and visual hallucinosis.
ClinicopathologicstudiessuggestthatwhenestablishedPDis
Currently, it remains unclear whether DLB, PD with later
diagnosedaccordingtocurrentU.K.BrainBankcriteria,there
dementia(PDD),andnondemented PDallrepresentaspec-
isa90%concordancebetweenexpertclinicalimpressionand
trumofLewybodydisease.Nigraldegenerationisafeature
the presence of nigral Lewy bodies (1).
ofall3oftheseconditions,incontrasttoAlzheimerdisease,
In early PD, however, the full triad of clinical symptoms
in which dopaminergic function remains intact. At post-
and signs (rest tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity) may not
mortemexamination,mostcasesofDLBshowamixtureo

Chunk 4:
ebetweenexpertclinicalimpressionand
trumofLewybodydisease.Nigraldegenerationisafeature
the presence of nigral Lewy bodies (1).
ofall3oftheseconditions,incontrasttoAlzheimerdisease,
In early PD, however, the full triad of clinical symptoms
in which dopaminergic function remains intact. At post-
and signs (rest tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity) may not
mortemexamination,mostcasesofDLBshowamixtureof
yet be manifested. Differential diagnoses include benign
cortical Lewy body inclusions and Alzheimer pathology.
essential or dystonic tremors (2) and parkinsonism associ-
Functionalimagingcandetectthepresenceofdopaminergic
dysfunction, cortical hypometabolism, and amyloid pathol-
ReceivedSep.26,2009;revisionacceptedNov.16,2009.
For correspondence or reprints contact: David J. Brooks, Imperial ogy in dementia syndromes, thus aiding their classification.
College London, Cyclotron Building, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane ThealgorithmpresentedinFigure1summarizestherole
Rd.,LondonW120NN,U.K.
E-mail:david.brooks@csc.mrc.ac.uk of structural and functional imaging for diagnosing and
COPYRIGHTª2010bytheSocietyofNuclearMedicine,Inc. managing different parkinsonian syndromes.
596 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
IMAGINGNIGRALSTRUCTURAL CHANGES ism/ephedrine poisoning; and hydrocephalus and allow them
to be excluded as secondary causes of parkinsonism.
MRI
Inversionrecoverysequencescanbedesignedtosuppress
Conventional MRI reveals brain structural changes as
either gray or white matter signal. Segmented inversion
reductions in volume (atrophy) and alterations in water-
proton relaxation T1 and T2 signals. Water normally flows recovery ratio imaging generates ratio images of gray
along neural tracts in the brain. Diffusion-weighted or matter–andwhitematter–suppressedsignalatavoxellevel.
diffusion tensor MRI can be used to quantify loss of Wi

Chunk 5:
changes as
either gray or white matter signal. Segmented inversion
reductions in volume (atrophy) and alterations in water-
proton relaxation T1 and T2 signals. Water normally flows recovery ratio imaging generates ratio images of gray
along neural tracts in the brain. Diffusion-weighted or matter–andwhitematter–suppressedsignalatavoxellevel.
diffusion tensor MRI can be used to quantify loss of Withthesegmentedinversionrecoveryratioapproach,allof
anisotropy(directionality)orincreaseinamplitudeofwater an initial series of 6 PD patients were reported to show
diffusion and so demonstrate disruption of neural tracts. agradientofalterednigralsignalthatwasabsentinhealthy
Thepathologicpresenceofironinaparamagneticchemical controls (6). A subsequent series from another center
form reduces T2 relaxation times because of the increased reportedsimilarfindingsin7of10patientswithestablished
magnetic susceptibility. PD, suggesting a sensitivity of 70% (7). Subtraction rather
Conventional T1- and T2-weighted MRI shows normal than ratio images of gray matter– and white matter–sup-
nigral structure in idiopathic PD and so is not diagnostically pressed signal can also be generated. With this approach,
helpful.VolumetricT1-weightedMRIstudieshavealsofailed Minati et al. (8) detected significant hypointensity of the
todetectareductioninnigralvolumeinPD,possiblybecause lateral nigra in PD. However, there was a 50% overlap
of difficulties in accurately defining the border of the nigra between normal and PD nigral signal. Although the use of
compacta(5).However,standardMRIsequencesarevaluable gray matter– and white matter–suppressing inversion re-
as they will reveal structural lesions such as basal ganglia covery sequencescan detectchangesinnigralstructuresin
tumors, granulomas, and calcification; vascular disease; al- PD,itisacomplicatedapproachtoimplementandcurrently
teredbasalgangliasignalduetoWilson’sdiseaseormangan- notsensitiveenoughtobeofdiagnosticvalue.
FIGURE1. PDimagingalgorithm

Chunk 6:
 matter– and white matter–suppressing inversion re-
as they will reveal structural lesions such as basal ganglia covery sequencescan detectchangesinnigralstructuresin
tumors, granulomas, and calcification; vascular disease; al- PD,itisacomplicatedapproachtoimplementandcurrently
teredbasalgangliasignalduetoWilson’sdiseaseormangan- notsensitiveenoughtobeofdiagnosticvalue.
FIGURE1. PDimagingalgorithm.
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 597

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
T2-weighted sequences are influenced by local increases marker for susceptibility to parkinsonism and may reflect
inmagneticsusceptibilitywhenraisedironcontentispresent midbrainirondeposition(13).Insupportofthisviewpoint,
in brain areas. With such an approach, Michaeli et al. (9) midbrain hyperechogenicity has been reported in premani-
have been able to detect increased nigral magnetic suscep- festmonogenicformsofparkinsonismincludingcarriersof
tibility in PD. Again, however, midbrain relaxation times a-synuclein, lysine-rich repeat kinase (LRRK2), parkin,
overlapped considerably with those of a healthy group. and DJ1 mutations (14,15).
A potential advance involves the use of diffusion tensor A recent prospective masked study has assessed the
imaging to determine regional fractional anisotropy within specificity and sensitivity of transcranial sonography for
the nigra. In a recent study, fractional anisotropy in the the differential diagnosis of PD (16). Sixty patients with
substantia nigra was measured in 14 de novo PD patients soft signs of parkinsonism underwent baseline transcranial
and 14 healthy volunteers matched for age and sex (10). sonography and then were clinically assessed every 3 mo
Nigral fractional anisotropy values were reduced in all PD for 1 y. At the end of the follow-up period, 39 were
patients, compared with the control group (Fig. 2A). The classifiedashavingPD,10ashavingatypicalpar

Chunk 7:
 novo PD patients soft signs of parkinsonism underwent baseline transcranial
and 14 healthy volunteers matched for age and sex (10). sonography and then were clinically assessed every 3 mo
Nigral fractional anisotropy values were reduced in all PD for 1 y. At the end of the follow-up period, 39 were
patients, compared with the control group (Fig. 2A). The classifiedashavingPD,10ashavingatypicalparkinsonian
greatest difference between the 2 groups was observed in syndromes (which do not show midbrain hyperechogenic-
thecaudalpartofthesubstantianigra.Thesefindingsarein ity),and4ashavingneitheroftheseconditions.Compared
agreement with postmortem studies, which show greater with the final clinical diagnosis, the sensitivity of trans-
cell loss in the ventrocaudal nigra than in the rostral cranial sonography for detecting PD at baseline was 91%
segment of this structure. PD patients were distinguished and the specificity was 82%. The positive predictive value
with 100% sensitivity and specificity from the healthy of transcranial sonography for PD was 93%, with an
volunteers on the basis of their fractional anisotropy value accuracy of 88%.
in the caudal nigra. If confirmed in larger cohorts of PD Although these results are promising, in other recent
patients, these findings suggest that diffusion tensor imag- series transcranial sonography has been reported to have
ing could be valuable for supporting a diagnosis of PD. sensitivitiesaslowas50%forclinicallyprobablePD(17).
There are also difficulties with the diagnostic use of
TranscranialSonography transcranial sonography: first, increased midbrain echoge-
Transcranial sonography detects ultrasound echoes from nicity has also been reported in 17% of patients with
brain structures. In an initial series, 92% of patients with essential tremor (18), 40% of depressed patients without
clinically established PD were reported to show bilaterally signs of PD (19), and 10% of age-matched healthy
increased echogenicity from the late

Chunk 8:
 increased midbrain echoge-
Transcranial sonography detects ultrasound echoes from nicity has also been reported in 17% of patients with
brain structures. In an initial series, 92% of patients with essential tremor (18), 40% of depressed patients without
clinically established PD were reported to show bilaterally signs of PD (19), and 10% of age-matched healthy
increased echogenicity from the lateral midbrain (Fig. 2B) volunteers (11), suggesting that the specificity of trans-
(11). The size of the transcranial sonography signal, cranialsonographyissuboptimal.Second,whereas90%of
however, does not correlate well with the disability rating subjectshaveasuitablepreauricularacousticbonewindow,
in PD and remains static over 5 y despite progression of in 10% no echoes can be detected. Finally, patients with
symptoms (12). It has been suggested that the presence of severe tremor have to be excluded because movement
midbrain hyperechogenicity is a trait rather than a state artifacts prevent reliable interpretation of the images.
FIGURE2. (A)Imagesoffractionalanisotropyofmidbrain.Nigralfractionalanisotropyisreducedinrostralcaudalgradientin
PD. (Reprinted with permission of (126).) (B) Transcranial sonography showing hyperechogenicity from lateral midbrain
(substantianigra)inPD.(Reprintedwithpermissionof(11).)
598 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
IMAGINGSTRUCTURAL CHANGEIN ATYPICAL PD fluoropropyl-2b-carbomethoxy-3b-(4-iodophenyl)tropane
(123I-FP-CIT) (DaTSCAN; GE Healthcare), 123I-altropane,
MRI can play a valuable role in discriminating atypical
and 11C-2-carbomethoxy-3-(4-18F-fluorophenyl)tropane
parkinsonian syndromes, such as multiple-system atrophy
(11C-CFT).Second,18F-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine(18F-dopa)
and progressive supranuclear palsy, from typical PD. Atro-
PET provides a marker of terminal dopa decarboxylase
phy of th

Chunk 9:
(123I-FP-CIT) (DaTSCAN; GE Healthcare), 123I-altropane,
MRI can play a valuable role in discriminating atypical
and 11C-2-carbomethoxy-3-(4-18F-fluorophenyl)tropane
parkinsonian syndromes, such as multiple-system atrophy
(11C-CFT).Second,18F-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine(18F-dopa)
and progressive supranuclear palsy, from typical PD. Atro-
PET provides a marker of terminal dopa decarboxylase
phy of the lentiform nucleus is a feature of these atypical
activity and dopamine turnover. Third, vesicle monoamine
disorders, but volumetric MRI has not proved sensitive
transporter availability in dopamine terminals can be ex-
enough to be of diagnostic value (20,21). In contrast,
amined with either 11C- or 18F-dihydrotetrabenazine PET.
diffusion-weighted and diffusion tensor MRI is highly
Early hemiparkinsonian patients show bilaterally reduced
sensitive to changes in striatal structure and potentially
putamen dopaminergic terminal function, activity being
useful for discriminating atypical from typical parkinsonian
moredepressedintheposteriorputamencontralateraltothe
disorders. Diffusion-weighted MRI has been reported to
affectedlimbs(Fig.4)(28,29).Head-of-caudateandventral
detect raised water-proton apparent diffusion coefficients in
striatal function is relatively preserved. Clinical par-
the putamen in 90%–100% of patients with clinically
kinsonism occurs when PD patients have lost 40%–50%
probable multiple-system atrophy and progressive supra-
of posterior putamen dopamine terminal function (30,31).
nuclear palsy, whereas apparent diffusion coefficients in
Levels of putamen 18F-dopa uptake and DAT binding
the putamen are normal in PD (Fig. 3) (22–24). Multiple-
correlate inversely with bradykinesia and rigidity of PD
systematrophycanbediscriminatedfromprogressivesupra-
patients,butinterestingly,notwithtremorseverity(32–34).
nuclear palsy by the presence of an altered water diffusion
This suggests that parkinsonian tremor is not a direct
signal in the middle cerebral peduncl

Chunk 10:
a uptake and DAT binding
the putamen are normal in PD (Fig. 3) (22–24). Multiple-
correlate inversely with bradykinesia and rigidity of PD
systematrophycanbediscriminatedfromprogressivesupra-
patients,butinterestingly,notwithtremorseverity(32–34).
nuclear palsy by the presence of an altered water diffusion
This suggests that parkinsonian tremor is not a direct
signal in the middle cerebral peduncle (25). These studies
consequence of nigrostriatal degeneration.
have all involved well-established atypical cases, however,
NotalldopaminefibersaredamagedinearlyPD—some
and itremainsto beseenhow welldiffusion-weightedMRI
increase their dopamine turnover as an adaptive mecha-
will perform with early gray cases in prospective series
nism. At the onset of rigidity and bradykinesia, globus
where clinical diagnostic uncertainty is still present.
pallidus interna18F-dopauptakeisincreasedbyupto50%
Interestingly,althoughnigraldegenerationisafeatureof
(35). As the disease advances, pallidal 18F-dopa storage
both typical and atypical parkinsonian syndromes, trans-
then falls, eventually becoming subnormal. Disability is
cranial sonography does not detect midbrain hyperechoge-
then severe and treatment complications develop. This
nicity in atypical PD. Increased echogenicity of the
observation suggests that both the putamen and the globus
lentiform nucleus is, however, present in most of these
pallidus interna require an intact dopaminergic input from
cases and absent in typical PD (26). A combination of
the nigra if limb movements are to be fluent and efficient,
normal midbrain signal combined with lentiform nucleus
anditiswhenbothsetsofprojectionsaredamagedthatthe
hyperechogenicity separated atypical from typical PD with
honeymoon period in PD reaches an end.
asensitivityof59%andspecificity of100%andapositive
When clinically probable PD and essential tremor
predictive value of 100%.
patients have been compared, striatal DAT imaging with
123I-FP-CIT SPECT has been shown to different

Chunk 11:
ned with lentiform nucleus
anditiswhenbothsetsofprojectionsaredamagedthatthe
hyperechogenicity separated atypical from typical PD with
honeymoon period in PD reaches an end.
asensitivityof59%andspecificity of100%andapositive
When clinically probable PD and essential tremor
predictive value of 100%.
patients have been compared, striatal DAT imaging with
123I-FP-CIT SPECT has been shown to differentiate these
IMAGINGPRESYNAPTIC DOPAMINERGICFUNCTION conditions with a sensitivity and specificity of over 90%
INPD (36). Several studies have examined the role of DAT
The function of dopamine terminals in PD can be imaging for determining whether gray parkinsonian cases
examinedinvivoin3mainways(27).First,theavailability are associated with striatal dopamine deficiency. In the
of presynaptic dopamine transporters (DAT) can be as- Query PD study, the standard of truth was the clinical
sessed with a variety of PET and SPECT tracers, most of impression of 2 movement disorder experts after 6 mo of
which are tropane-based. Examples include 123I-(2)-2b- clinical follow-up (37). Although referring clinicians
carbomethoxy-3b-(4-iodophenyl)tropane (123I-b-CIT) showed 92% sensitivity for diagnosing dopamine-deficient
(Dopascan; Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc.), 123I-N-3- parkinsonism, their baseline clinical specificity was poor
FIGURE 3. Color-coded diffusion-
weightedMRimagesofhealthysubject,
patient with PD, and patient with atyp-
ical parkinsonian syndrome multiple-
system atrophy. Apparent diffusion
coefficient is normal in striatum of PD
patient but raised in multiple-system
atrophy because of neuronal loss that
targets putamen. MSA 5 multiple-sys-
tematrophy.(Reprintedwithpermission
of(22).)
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 599

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
the work-up of gray parkinsonian cases helps in planning
theirmanagement.However,aproblemwiththeCUPSstudy
is that because 

Chunk 12:
se of neuronal loss that
targets putamen. MSA 5 multiple-sys-
tematrophy.(Reprintedwithpermission
of(22).)
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 599

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
the work-up of gray parkinsonian cases helps in planning
theirmanagement.However,aproblemwiththeCUPSstudy
is that because no nonimaged control group was included,
one cannot be sure that knowledge of DAT binding at
baseline led to improved patient outcome. Additionally, the
pathology of these patients still remains unclear as clinical
follow-up was the standard of truth.
Up to 15% of early cases suspected of representing
dopamine-deficient parkinsonian syndrome showed normal
dopamine terminal function on PET or SPECT (3,4). The
prognostic value of this finding remains uncertain, but
a series by Marshall et al. has helped to throw light on this
(41). One hundred fifty patients with possible early parkin-
sonism but normal FP-CIT SPECT findings were followed
up for 2 y. Only 4 (3%) of these patients showed clinical
FIGURE4. 123I-FP-CITSPECTimagesofhealthyvolunteer progressionandwerestillbelievedtohavePD2ylater;the
and patient with early hemi-PD. PD patient shows asym- rest were labeled as having either benign tremulous or
metric bilateral loss of putamen DAT binding. (Courtesy of nondegenerative parkinsonian disorders. These findings im-
DonaldGrossett.)
ply that a SPECT or PET finding of normal presynaptic
dopaminergic function in a case of suspected PD is associ-
atedwithagoodprognosiswhatevertheultimatediagnosis.
(30%) compared with the standard of truth whereas OneofthemorecommoncausesofconfusionwithPDisan
baseline imaging specificity with 123I-b-CIT SPECT was adult-onset dystonic tremor, which can present as an asym-
100%. These findings suggest that clinicians tend to over- metric resting arm tremor with impaired arm swing but
call a diagnosis of PD in gray cases. without evidence of true 

Chunk 13:
atediagnosis.
(30%) compared with the standard of truth whereas OneofthemorecommoncausesofconfusionwithPDisan
baseline imaging specificity with 123I-b-CIT SPECT was adult-onset dystonic tremor, which can present as an asym-
100%. These findings suggest that clinicians tend to over- metric resting arm tremor with impaired arm swing but
call a diagnosis of PD in gray cases. without evidence of true akinesia (2). In these patients,
A similar conclusion was reached by investigators functionalimagingshouldbeconsideredtoavoidinappropri-
participating in a European multicenter, prospective, lon- ate medication with dopaminergic agents. Marshall et al.
gitudinal study in which clinical diagnosis was compared presented11patientswhoinitiallyfulfilleddiagnosticcriteria
with 123I-FP-CIT SPECT findings (38). Serial observations for PD and were treated with dopaminergic agents but in
were performed over 3 y on patients in whom there was whomemergingdiagnosticdoubtsledtoDATimagingwith
initial diagnostic uncertainty between degenerative parkin- FP-CIT SPECT—which had negative results—and subse-
sonismandabenigntremordisorder.Thestandardoftruth quentantiparkinsoniantherapywithdrawal(42).Withdrawal
wasexaminationofvideosoftheclinicalfeaturesat36mo was achieved without clinical deterioration, suggesting that
by2movementdisorderexpertswhowerenotawareofthe dopaminergicimagingcanbevaluablewheninappropriateuse
imaging results. Three readers, unaware of the clinical ofantiparkinsonianmedicationissuspected.
diagnosis,classified123I-FP-CITSPECTfindingsasnormal
or abnormal by visual inspection. In 99 patients who REGIONAL CEREBRAL GLUCOSEMETABOLISM
ANDPD
completed the 36-mo trial, on-site baseline clinical di-
agnosis, compared with the standard of truth, had a sensi- 18F-FDG PET can be used to assess levels of resting
tivity of 93% but a specificity of only 46%. Baseline regionalcerebralglucosemetabolism.Absolutelevelsinthe
123I-FP-CIT SPECT showed a mean sensitivity of 78% lentiform nucleus

Chunk 14:
 patients who REGIONAL CEREBRAL GLUCOSEMETABOLISM
ANDPD
completed the 36-mo trial, on-site baseline clinical di-
agnosis, compared with the standard of truth, had a sensi- 18F-FDG PET can be used to assess levels of resting
tivity of 93% but a specificity of only 46%. Baseline regionalcerebralglucosemetabolism.Absolutelevelsinthe
123I-FP-CIT SPECT showed a mean sensitivity of 78% lentiform nucleus liewithin the reference range in PD (43);
andaspecificityof97%,againimplyingthatadiagnosisof however, covariance analysis reveals an abnormal profile of
PD was overcalled in around 15% of subjects. relatively raised resting lentiform nucleus and lowered
The ‘‘Impact of Dopamine Transporter SPECT on the frontal and parietotemporal metabolism (44). The degree
Diagnosis and Management of Patients with Clinically of expression of this PD-related profile correlates with
Uncertain Parkinsonian Syndromes’’ (CUPS) trial was de- clinicaldiseaseseverity,thusprovidingapotentialbiomarker
signed to establish whether a knowledge of baseline striatal of disease progression. Successful treatment with levodopa
DAT binding influenced subsequent management (39). or deep brain stimulation reduces expression of the PD-
When FP-CIT SPECT findings were divulged to clinicians, related profile (45,46). Given this, changes in treatment
the diagnosis of dopamine-deficient parkinsonian syndrome could result in a potential confounding factor if 18F-FDG
wasrevisedin52%ofthe118patientsandthemanagement PET were to be used as a biomarker to follow PD pro-
strategy was changed in 72% of patients. A 2-y follow-up gression.
found that 90% of subjects still retained the diagnosis Eckert et al. performed 18F-FDG PETon 8 patients with
assigned after clinicians were made aware of baseline FP- suspected early parkinsonism but normal findings on 18F-
CIT SPECT findings (40). These studies support the view dopa PET (47). None of these 8 patients expressed a PD-
thatincludingameasureofstriataldopaminergicfunctionin 

Chunk 15:
ression.
found that 90% of subjects still retained the diagnosis Eckert et al. performed 18F-FDG PETon 8 patients with
assigned after clinicians were made aware of baseline FP- suspected early parkinsonism but normal findings on 18F-
CIT SPECT findings (40). These studies support the view dopa PET (47). None of these 8 patients expressed a PD-
thatincludingameasureofstriataldopaminergicfunctionin relatedprofileofglucosemetabolism,andover3ynoneof
600 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
themshowedanyclinicalprogressionoftheirdisorder.This
finding reinforces the viewpoint that normal dopaminergic
imaging excludes the presence of a degenerative parkinso-
nian syndrome.
FUNCTIONALIMAGING ANDATYPICAL PD
Imaging presynaptic dopaminergic terminal function
with either striatal 18F-dopa uptake or a DAT SPECT
marker shows high sensitivity for detecting atypical par-
kinsonian syndromes but only poor specificity for discrim-
inating them from typical PD (48,49). The typical gradient
of loss of dopaminergic function in PD, where the head of
the caudate is relatively spared, is less evident in pro- FIGURE 5. 18F-FDG PET images of PD and multiple-
gressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration system atrophy patient. Multiple-system atrophy patient
shows significant striatal reduction of glucose metabolism.
patients(48,50,51).Inprogressivesupranuclearpalsy,there
MSA5multiple-systematrophy.
is a more symmetric pattern of nigrostriatal dysfunction
than in other parkinsonian syndromes.
Mutations of the LRRK2 gene—PARK8—are the most
Incontrast,measurementsofrestingglucosemetabolism
commonlyknowncauseoflater-onsetdominantlyinherited
can be helpful for separating typical from atypical parkin-
PD.Adamsetal.haveused18F-dopa,11C-dihydrotetraben-
sonian syndromes. In typical idiopathic PD, lentiform
azine, and 11C-methylphenidate PET to 

Chunk 16:
ysfunction
than in other parkinsonian syndromes.
Mutations of the LRRK2 gene—PARK8—are the most
Incontrast,measurementsofrestingglucosemetabolism
commonlyknowncauseoflater-onsetdominantlyinherited
can be helpful for separating typical from atypical parkin-
PD.Adamsetal.haveused18F-dopa,11C-dihydrotetraben-
sonian syndromes. In typical idiopathic PD, lentiform
azine, and 11C-methylphenidate PET to assess the striatal
nucleusglucosemetabolismispreservedorraised,whereas
dopamine storage capacity, vesicular monoamine trans-
it is reduced in most atypical cases (Fig. 5) (43,52–54).
porter binding, and DAT binding in 15 family members
ofaLRRK2kindred(61).The4clinicallyaffectedLRRK2
DETECTIONOFPRECLINICAL PD
membersstudiedhadimagingfindingssimilartoidiopathic
For every patient who presents with clinical PD there PD: loss of dopaminergic function targeting the putamen.
may be 10 subclinical cases with incidental brain stem Twoasymptomaticmutationcarriersshowedreducedputa-
Lewy bodydiseaseinthe community(55).Subjectsat risk men 11C-methylphenidate but normal 18F-dopa uptake
of developing PD include carriers of genetic mutations suggesting a selective reduction of DAT binding. This
known to be associated with parkinsonism (a-synuclein, finding is in line with findings in idiopathic PD, in which
parkin,LRRK2,glucocerebrosidaseA),relativesofpatients putamen DAT binding is known to be relatively more
with the disorder, elderly subjects with idiopathic hypos- depressed than 18F-dopa uptake (62). Another 2 asymp-
mia, and patients with rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior tomaticmutationcarriershadDATbindingthatwasnormal
disorders. atbaselinebutsubsequentlyfellover4yoffollow-upwhile
When asymptomatic adult relatives in kindreds with 18F-dopa uptake remained normal. The authors concluded
familial PD are studied, 25% show reduced levels of that the neurochemical phenotype of LRRK2 mutations
putamen 18F-dopa uptake and one third of these sub- was indistinguishable from that of sporadic 

Chunk 17:
iershadDATbindingthatwasnormal
disorders. atbaselinebutsubsequentlyfellover4yoffollow-upwhile
When asymptomatic adult relatives in kindreds with 18F-dopa uptake remained normal. The authors concluded
familial PD are studied, 25% show reduced levels of that the neurochemical phenotype of LRRK2 mutations
putamen 18F-dopa uptake and one third of these sub- was indistinguishable from that of sporadic PD. Asymp-
sequently develop clinical parkinsonism (56). Parkin gene tomatic gene carriers, however, can show downregulation
mutations are the most commonly known cause of young- of DAT binding and preservation of dopa decarboxylase
onset recessive parkinsonism. Parkin is a ubiquitin ligase, activity, which will act to maintain levels of synaptic
andmanymutationsofthegenehavebeendescribed.Most dopamine and delay the onset of parkinsonism.
clinically affected cases are compound heterozygote gene RelativesofPDpatients with idiopathichyposmiaareat
carriers (a different mutation on the 2 chromosome 6s) risk of PD. Ponsen et al. collected 40 such relatives after
rather than homozygous for the same mutation. Clinically screening 400 subjects for hyposmia and, with 123I-b-CIT
affected compound heterozygotegene carriers showsevere SPECT, found that7oftheseshowed reduced striatalDAT
reductions of striatal 18F-dopa uptake even when disability binding (63). Four of these 7 subsequently converted to
is mild, suggesting that adaptive processes develop to clinical PD over a 2-y period.
compensate for their dopamine deficiency (57,58). The Patients with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep be-
pattern of dopaminergic deficit in symptomatic parkin haviordisorderareathighriskofdevelopingparkinsonism
patients mimics that of idiopathic PD, putamen being ordementia. Using 123I-IPT SPECT, Eisensehr et al. found
targeted, but the caudate and midbrain are relatively more reduced striatal DAT binding in all 5 of their patients with
involved (59). Asymptomatic heterozygote parkin gene idiopathic rap

Chunk 18:
tern of dopaminergic deficit in symptomatic parkin haviordisorderareathighriskofdevelopingparkinsonism
patients mimics that of idiopathic PD, putamen being ordementia. Using 123I-IPT SPECT, Eisensehr et al. found
targeted, but the caudate and midbrain are relatively more reduced striatal DAT binding in all 5 of their patients with
involved (59). Asymptomatic heterozygote parkin gene idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder
carriers also show a mild but significant reduction in (64). In another series, 11 patients with sleep disorders
putamen 18F-dopa uptake (60). This dopaminergic deficit wereinvestigatedwithFP-CITSPECT,andreducedstriatal
could conceivably make heterozygote carriers more sus- DAT binding was found in 3, 1 of whom had evidence of
ceptible to late-onset PD. clinical parkinsonism (65).
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 601

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
Increased midbrain echogenicity has been reported in 5 levels of synaptic dopamine are generated by the former
of 7 asymptomatic parkin gene carriers (14) and 11 of 30 (75). This reflects the compensatory increase in dopamine
idiopathic hyposmic patients (66). Three of the 5 parkin turnover in remaining dopamine terminals in advanced
carriers with abnormal transcranial sonography findings fluctuators and their failure to buffer the dopamine gener-
showed reduced striatal 18F-dopa uptake, whereas 5 of the atedfromexogenouslevodopabecauseofthelossofDATs
11 hyposmic patients had reduced striatal FP-CIT binding. and vesicles.
Midbrain hyperechogenicity detected by ultrasound in at- The failure to buffer dopamine levels by the striatum in
risk subjects, therefore, is associated with dopamine cell advanced PD results in high nonphysiologic swings in
dysfunction in around half of the subjects. A study from synapticdopaminelevels.This,inturn,promotesexcessive
2006 reported no correlation between le

Chunk 19:
T binding. and vesicles.
Midbrain hyperechogenicity detected by ultrasound in at- The failure to buffer dopamine levels by the striatum in
risk subjects, therefore, is associated with dopamine cell advanced PD results in high nonphysiologic swings in
dysfunction in around half of the subjects. A study from synapticdopaminelevels.This,inturn,promotesexcessive
2006 reported no correlation between levels of midbrain dopamine receptor internalization into neurons, the normal
hyperechogenicity in PD and reductions in striatal DAT mechanism for dissociating dopamine from the receptor,
binding measured with 99mTRODAT SPECT. This finding leading to fluctuating and unpredictable treatment re-
again suggests that transcranial sonography is detecting sponses. In support of this viewpoint, De la Fuente-
nondopaminergicpathologypresentinPDsuchasmidbrain Fernandez et al. (76) have measured striatal 11C-raclopride
iron deposition (67). binding in PD at 1 and 4 h after oral levodopa challenges.
These workers found that fluctuators showed transient
MECHANISMS UNDERLYING FLUCTUATIONS 8-fold rises in synaptic dopamine levels whereas sustained
ANDDYSKINESIAS
responders generated only 2-fold rises, which then slowly
PD patients show reduced putamen 18F-dopa uptake further increased over the next 4 h. It is this phenomenon,
whethertheyhavesustainedorfluctuatingmotorresponses rather than changes in postsynaptic dopamine D and D
1 2
to levodopa, but mean uptake is 20% lower in the latter receptoravailability,thatresultsinthemorerapidbutshort-
group (68). There is, however, considerable overlap of lived response of advanced PD patients to oral levodopa.
individual levels of putamen 18F-dopa uptake in fluctuator These workers also noted that ‘‘off’’ episodes could co-
and nonfluctuator cohorts, and so, loss of putamen dopa- incide with apparently adequate synaptic dopamine levels,
mine terminal function cannot be the sole factor respon- again supporting the concept that excessive receptor in

Chunk 20:
lived response of advanced PD patients to oral levodopa.
individual levels of putamen 18F-dopa uptake in fluctuator These workers also noted that ‘‘off’’ episodes could co-
and nonfluctuator cohorts, and so, loss of putamen dopa- incide with apparently adequate synaptic dopamine levels,
mine terminal function cannot be the sole factor respon- again supporting the concept that excessive receptor in-
sible for determining the timing of onset of motor ternalization could lead to unpredictable nonavailability of
complications. dopamine binding sites at times.
11C-raclopridePETstudieshavereportedthatputamenD Intheir11C-raclopridePETstudy,Paveseetal.notedthat
2
bindingisinitiallyincreasedbyupto20%indenovoPDbut the severity of peak-dose dyskinesias generated by levo-
that after 6 mo of treatment with levodopa, D receptor dopa administration in advanced-PD patients correlated
2
availability returns to normal (69,70). 11C-SCH23390 PET withstriatallevelsofdopaminegenerated(74).Thisfinding
reveals normal striatal D binding in de novo PD, whereas implies that overstimulation of dopamine receptors is
1
patients chronically exposed to levodopa show a 20% re- a major factor in generating peak-dose dyskinesias. How-
duction (71). Striatal dopamine D and D receptor avail- ever, studies on animal lesion models of PD have shown
1 2
ability has been compared in dyskinetic and nondyskinetic thatchangesinpeptidetransmissionalsoplayanimportant
groupsofPDpatientswithsimilarclinicaldiseaseduration role (77). Medium spiny neurons in the caudate and
and severity who were receiving a similar daily dose of putamen project to the external and internal pallidum,
levodopa(71).SimilarlevelsofD andD receptorbinding where, along with g-aminobutyric acid, they release en-
1 2
werefound,suggestingthatonsetofmotorfluctuationsand kephalin, dynorphin, and substance P (globus pallidus
dyskinesias in PD is not driven by alterations in striatal interna). Enkephalin binds mainly to d-opioid sites and
postsyna

Chunk 21:
e of putamen project to the external and internal pallidum,
levodopa(71).SimilarlevelsofD andD receptorbinding where, along with g-aminobutyric acid, they release en-
1 2
werefound,suggestingthatonsetofmotorfluctuationsand kephalin, dynorphin, and substance P (globus pallidus
dyskinesias in PD is not driven by alterations in striatal interna). Enkephalin binds mainly to d-opioid sites and
postsynapticdopaminereceptoravailability. inhibits g-aminobutyric acid release in the enkephalin.
11C-raclopride PET is able to indirectly detect synaptic Dynorphin binds to k-opioid sites and inhibits glutamate
dopamine fluxes by monitoring changes in striatal D release in the globus pallidus interna from subthalamic
2
receptor availability (72). The higher the extracellular projections. The caudate and putamen contain high densi-
dopaminelevel,thelowerthedopamineD siteavailability tiesofm-,k-,andd-opioidsitesandalsoneurokinin1sites,
2
to the tracer. Animal microdialysis studies suggest that which bind substance P. Opioid receptors are located both
a 25% fall in putamen 11C-raclopride uptake after amphet- presynapticallyondopamineterminals,wheretheyregulate
amineequatestoa10-foldriseinsynapticdopaminelevels dopaminerelease,andpostsynapticallyoninterneuronsand
(73). When PD patients are given levodopa treatment they medium spiny projection neurons.
show a fall in striatal 11C-raclopride binding. Pavese et al. 11C-diprenorphine PET is a nonselective marker of m-,
havereportedthattheresponseofbradykinesiaandrigidity k-, and d-opioid sites, and its binding is sensitive to levels
tolevodopainPDcorrelateswiththeresultingincreasesin of endogenous opioids. Significant reductions in 11C-
striatal dopamine levels detected with 11C-raclopride PET diprenorphine binding in caudate, putamen, thalamus, and
(74). The fall in striatal 11C-raclopride binding after anteriorcingulatehavebeenreportedindyskineticpatients,
levodopaisgreaterintheputamenofadvanced-PDpatients compared with sustained respon

Chunk 22:
Dcorrelateswiththeresultingincreasesin of endogenous opioids. Significant reductions in 11C-
striatal dopamine levels detected with 11C-raclopride PET diprenorphine binding in caudate, putamen, thalamus, and
(74). The fall in striatal 11C-raclopride binding after anteriorcingulatehavebeenreportedindyskineticpatients,
levodopaisgreaterintheputamenofadvanced-PDpatients compared with sustained responders (78). Individual levels
with fluctuations than in early cases, implying that higher of putamen 11C-diprenorphine uptake correlated inversely
602 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
withtheseverityofdyskinesia.Thesefindingsare compat- noradrenergic and limbic dopaminergic innervation addi-
ible with the presence of raised basal ganglia levels of tional to the striatal dopamine deficiency present. The use
enkephalin and dynorphin in these dyskinetic PD patients. ofnonselectiveinhibitorsofmonoaminetransportersboost-
18F-SPARQ PETis a selective marker of neurokinin 1 site ing synaptic levels of dopamine and noradrenaline would,
availability. In a preliminary study, thalamic neurokinin 1 therefore, seem a rational approach for treating depression
availabilityhasbeenshowntobereducedindyskineticPD in PD rather than the use of selective serotonin reuptake
patientsbutnormalinnondyskineticpatients(79).Thesein inhibitors.
vivo PET findings support the abnormal presence of
elevatedlevelsofendogenouspeptidesinthebasalganglia TREATMENT-RELATED IMPULSE
of dyskinetic PD patients. CONTROLDISORDERS
When PD patients are exposed to dopaminergic medi-
IMAGINGTHE PHARMACOLOGY OFDEPRESSION
cation—particularly agonists—a small minority develop
INPD
impulse control disorders such as pathologic gambling
The prevalence of depression in PD has been reported to and hypersexuality in the absence of any previous history.
rangefrom10%to45%(80).BecauseLewybod

Chunk 23:
LSE
of dyskinetic PD patients. CONTROLDISORDERS
When PD patients are exposed to dopaminergic medi-
IMAGINGTHE PHARMACOLOGY OFDEPRESSION
cation—particularly agonists—a small minority develop
INPD
impulse control disorders such as pathologic gambling
The prevalence of depression in PD has been reported to and hypersexuality in the absence of any previous history.
rangefrom10%to45%(80).BecauseLewybodypathology Impulse control disorders can devastate the quality of life
isknowntoaffectserotonergicandnoradrenergicaswellas of PD patients and their families; affected patients have
dopaminergicneurotransmission,dysfunctionofanyorallof gambled away their life savings before the problem has
these systems would seem to be a reasonable candidate for cometolight.Themechanismsunderlyingthedevelopment
the functional substrate of depression (81). To date, func- of these behavioral disturbances in PD are currently under
tional imaging has failed to demonstrate a correlation extensive investigation.
between serotonergic dysfunction and depression in PD. Using 99mTc-ethylcysteinate dimer bicisate SPECT,
123I-b-CIT binds with nanomolar affinity to dopamine, a marker of regional cerebral blood flow, it has been
noradrenaline, and serotonin transporters. Although striatal reported that PD patients with pathologic gambling show
uptake of 123I-b-CIT 24 h after intravenous injection restingoveractivityofarighthemispherenetworkinvolved
primarily reflects DAT binding, midbrain uptake 1 h after in reward processing that includes the orbitofrontal cortex,
administration reflects serotonin transporter availability hippocampus, amygdala, insula, and ventral pallidum (86).
(82). Kim et al. have reported normal brain stem 123I- PD patients with pathologic gambling have also been
b-CIT uptake in PD. They found no difference between studied with 11C-raclopride PET during performance of
uptake in depressed and nondepressed patients and no a gambling task. The pathologic gamblers demonstrated
correlati

Chunk 24:
vailability hippocampus, amygdala, insula, and ventral pallidum (86).
(82). Kim et al. have reported normal brain stem 123I- PD patients with pathologic gambling have also been
b-CIT uptake in PD. They found no difference between studied with 11C-raclopride PET during performance of
uptake in depressed and nondepressed patients and no a gambling task. The pathologic gamblers demonstrated
correlation between radiotracer uptake and Hamilton De- greater decreases in ventral striatum D binding during
2
pression Rating Scale scores (83). gambling (13.9%) than control patients (8.1%), providing
Theserotonin5-hydroxytryptaminereceptor1A(5-HT ) supportive evidence that excessive limbic dopaminergic
1A
is found as an autoreceptor on 5-HT cell bodies in the stimulation underlies the neurobiology of impulse control
midbrain raphe nuclei, where it acts to inhibit serotonin disorders in PD (87).
release, and also postsynaptically on cortical pyramidal
neurons. 11C-WAY 100635 PET is an in vivo marker of MECHANISMS UNDERLYING DEMENTIA IN PD
HT sites,andPDpatientsshowa25%reductionofHT
1A 1A The overall prevalence of dementia is around 40% in
binding in the midbrain raphe, compared with healthy
patientswithPDacrossdifferentseries,andtheincidenceis
controls. However, the level of reduction is similar in PD
6timeshigherthanthatinage-matchedhealthypeople,in-
patientswhetherahistoryofdepressionfeaturesornot(84).
creasing with age (88). If PD patients livefor 20 y, around
Theresultsfromthese11C-WAY100635PETand123I-b-CIT
80% develop this complication (89). Factors contributing
SPECT studies, therefore, are in agreement and do not
to the cognitive dysfunction include direct involvement of
support the view that serotonergic loss contributes to de-
the cortex by Lewy body pathology, loss of cholinergic
pressioninPD.Theyalsoprovidenorationalefortheuseof
projections from the nucleus basalis of Meynert, degener-
selectiveserotoninreuptakeinhibitorstotreatPDdepression.
ation of mesofrontal and m

Chunk 25:
efore, are in agreement and do not
to the cognitive dysfunction include direct involvement of
support the view that serotonergic loss contributes to de-
the cortex by Lewy body pathology, loss of cholinergic
pressioninPD.Theyalsoprovidenorationalefortheuseof
projections from the nucleus basalis of Meynert, degener-
selectiveserotoninreuptakeinhibitorstotreatPDdepression.
ation of mesofrontal and mesolimbic dopaminergic pro-
11C-methyl(1R-2-exo-3-exo)-8-methyl-3-(4-methylphenyl)-
jections, coexistent Alzheimer disease, and small-vessel
8-azabicyclo[3.2.1]octane-2-carboxylate (11C-RTI 32) PET
pathology. The presence of these various contributors can
is a marker of DATand noradrenaline transporter binding.
bedetectedwithacombinationofstructuralandfunctional
Nondepressed PD patients show reduced putamen 11C-RTI
imaging.
32 uptake, but patients with a history of depression show
additional reductions of 11C-RTI 32 binding in the norad- MRI Volumetry
renergic locus coeruleus, the thalamus, and the limbic Voxel-based morphometry can be applied to volumetric
system(amygdala,ventralstriatum, andanteriorcingulate) MRItolocalizesignificantregionalbrainvolumereductionsin
(85). Severity of anxiety inversely correlates with 11C-RTI patientsatavoxellevel.WhenPDDpatientsarestudiedwith
32 binding in these regions. These results suggest that voxel-basedmorphometry,significanthippocampal,thalamic,
depression and anxiety in PD are associated with loss of and anterior cingulate atrophy can be detected (90). Sub-
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 603

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
clinical volume loss in these areas can also be detected in clinical impression, which diagnosed only 4 of the 9 cases
nondemented PD patients. As PDD progresses, a further of DLB correctly in life.
volumelossoccursfromcorticalassociationareas(91).The In a follow-up series gathered over 10 y, these workers
bound

Chunk 26:
rom jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
clinical volume loss in these areas can also be detected in clinical impression, which diagnosed only 4 of the 9 cases
nondemented PD patients. As PDD progresses, a further of DLB correctly in life.
volumelossoccursfromcorticalassociationareas(91).The In a follow-up series gathered over 10 y, these workers
boundary-shiftintegralapproachappliedtovolumetric MRI reported correlations between clinical impression, pathol-
allows whole-brainvolume changes to be quantitated. With ogy,andstriatal123I-FP-CITuptakein20dementiapatients
thisapproach,Burtonetal.computeda0.31%annuallossof (8 had pathologically proven DLB; 9 had Alzheimer
brainvolume in PD (similar to healthy elderly individuals), pathology, often with coexisting cerebrovascular disease;
whereasinPDDtheannuallosswas1.12%,approachingthe and 3 had other diagnoses—frontotemporal dementia,
2% reported for Alzheimer disease (92). These workers corticobasal degeneration, or nonspecific pathology) (99).
concludedthatMRImayprovideausefultoolforfollowing Using pathology as the standard of truth, Walker et al.
progressionofPDwithdementia. found that an initial diagnosis of DLB based on clinical
consensuscriteriahadasensitivityof75%andaspecificity
MetabolicImaging of 42%. In contrast, the baseline sensitivity of 123I-FP-CIT
In PD patients who develop dementia, 18F-FDG PET has SPECT for making a diagnosis of DLB was 88% and the
demonstrated a characteristic pattern of reduced resting specificity was 100%.
regionalcerebralglucose metabolismtargeting the posterior Parallelresultshaveemergedfromalongitudinalclinical
cingulate, parietal, and temporal association regions, with study of 44 individuals labeled as having possible DLB
lesser involvement of the prefrontal cortex (93,94). Primary whoallhadundergonebaseline123I-FP-CITSPECT(100).
motorandvisualareasandthebasalgangliaarespared.This A consensus panel, unaware of baseline SPECT findings,
p

Chunk 27:
 the posterior Parallelresultshaveemergedfromalongitudinalclinical
cingulate, parietal, and temporal association regions, with study of 44 individuals labeled as having possible DLB
lesser involvement of the prefrontal cortex (93,94). Primary whoallhadundergonebaseline123I-FP-CITSPECT(100).
motorandvisualareasandthebasalgangliaarespared.This A consensus panel, unaware of baseline SPECT findings,
pattern of reduced glucose metabolism is similar to that assigned a clinical diagnosis after 12 mo offollow-up, and
reported in Alzheimer disease (95), suggesting that Lewy thisdiagnosiswasusedasthestandardoftruth.Nineteenof
body and Alzheimer pathology are associated with over- the 44 possible cases of DLB were diagnosed as probable
lapping patterns of cortical neuronal dysfunction. Temporo- DLBafterfollow-up,and12ofthesehadabnormal123I-FP-
parietal cortical hypometabolism can also be observed in CIT SPECT findings at baseline (sensitivity, 63%). Seven
a minority of nondemented PD patients with established of the 44 possible cases of DLB were reclassified as
disease, suggesting that subclinical cortical Lewy body Alzheimer disease at follow-up, and all had normal DAT
involvement may already be present (96). It remains to be binding at baseline (specificity, 100%). These workers
determined whether the observed glucose hypometabolism concluded that DAT imaging had a useful supportive role
in these subjects is a predictor of late-onset dementia. DLB in classifying uncertain dementia cases.
is characterized by onset of dementia associated with 123I-FP-CIT SPECT has been used to assess the relative
a combination of parkinsonism, visual hallucinations, psy- extent and pattern of striatal DAT loss in patients with
chosis, and fluctuating confusion. Again, the pattern of DLB, compared with PDD patients (101). Striatal 123I-FP-
reduced 18F-FDG uptake resembles that seen in Alzheimer CIT uptake was reduced by a similar magnitude in DLB,
disease, though more severe involvement of the 

Chunk 28:
the relative
a combination of parkinsonism, visual hallucinations, psy- extent and pattern of striatal DAT loss in patients with
chosis, and fluctuating confusion. Again, the pattern of DLB, compared with PDD patients (101). Striatal 123I-FP-
reduced 18F-FDG uptake resembles that seen in Alzheimer CIT uptake was reduced by a similar magnitude in DLB,
disease, though more severe involvement of the occipital PDD, and PD but again was normal in Alzheimer disease
cortex has been reported (97). patients.ComparedwithPDpatients,inwhomtheputamen
Dopaminergic Imaging
Although Lewy body pathology targets the substantia
nigra, this nucleus is spared in Alzheimer disease. In an
initial series, Walker et al. (98) assessed the integrity of
nigrostriatalfunctionbymeasuringDATbindingwith123I-
FP-CITSPECTinpatientswithPD,Alzheimerdisease,and
DLB. They reported, as would be expected, that PD and
DLB patients had significantly reduced striatal uptake of
123I-FP-CIT, whereas this uptakewas normal in Alzheimer
disease (Fig. 6). Autopsy data subsequently became avail-
able for 10 of the dementia subjects investigated with
SPECT. All 4 subjects proven to have DLB at postmortem
examination showed reduced striatal 123I-FP-CIT uptake.
Four of 5 autopsy-proven Alzheimer patients showed
normal striatal 123I-FP-CIT uptake, whereas the fifth, who
had been diagnosed with DLB in life, had concomitant
small-vessel disease and showed reduced DAT binding. FIGURE 6. FP-CIT SPECT images of healthy subject and
123I-FP-CIT SPECT, therefore, provided a sensitivity of PD, Alzheimer, and DLB patients. Striatal DAT binding is
100%andaspecificityof83%forseparationofDLBfrom reducedinPDandDLBpatients.(Reprintedwithpermission
of(98).)
Alzheimerdisease.Thisresultcomparesfavorablywiththe
604 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
is selectively targeted resulting in a caudat

Chunk 29:
binding is
100%andaspecificityof83%forseparationofDLBfrom reducedinPDandDLBpatients.(Reprintedwithpermission
of(98).)
Alzheimerdisease.Thisresultcomparesfavorablywiththe
604 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
is selectively targeted resulting in a caudate–putamen Theeffectofcholinesteraseinhibitortherapyoncerebral
gradient of DAT binding loss, patients with DLB and glucose metabolism has been assessed in 12 PDD patients
PDD showed a more uniform striatal reduction in 123I- (107).Cholinesteraseinhibitortreatmentimprovedmemory
FP-CITbinding,withareducedcaudate–putamengradient. andinducedsignificantincreasesincerebralmetabolismin
There was a significant correlation between the Mini the left angular gyrus (extending to the supramarginal area
Mental State Examination scores and 123I-FP-CIT binding andleftsuperiorandmiddlegyri),therightsuperiorgyrus,
in PDD, supporting the hypothesis that striatal dopaminer- and the left middle orbitofrontal gyrus. There were signif-
gic loss contributes to the cognitive impairment of these icant correlations between improvements in Mini Mental
patients. State Examination scores and increased cerebral metabo-
The role of mesofrontal dopaminergic projections in PD lism in the left supramarginal, orbitofrontal, and cingulate
with dementia has been investigated with 18F-dopa PET areas.
using statistical parametric mapping to localize significant
reductions in dopamine storage capacity at a voxel level. Measuring b-Amyloid Load in PDDementia
Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) is a neutral thioflavin that
When PD patients with and without dementia were
showsnanomolaraffinityforfibrillarb-amyloidplaquesin
matched for age, disease duration, and disease severity,
interrogation of their 18F-dopa uptake images with statis- Alzheimer brain slices but low affinity for intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles and Lewy

Chunk 30:
suring b-Amyloid Load in PDDementia
Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) is a neutral thioflavin that
When PD patients with and without dementia were
showsnanomolaraffinityforfibrillarb-amyloidplaquesin
matched for age, disease duration, and disease severity,
interrogation of their 18F-dopa uptake images with statis- Alzheimer brain slices but low affinity for intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles and Lewy bodies (108). 11C-PIB
tical parametric mapping localized a reduced capacity for
PET studies have reported 2-fold increases in tracer re-
putamen dopamine storage in both groups. However,
tention in the association cortex and cingulate of patients
compared with the PD patients, the PDD patients showed
additional reductions in 18F-dopa uptake in the right with Alzheimer disease, compared with healthy controls
(109,110). 11C-PIB PET has been used to determine the
caudate and bilaterally in the ventral striatum and the
prevalenceofaraisedamyloidloadinDLBandPDD(Fig.
anteriorcingulate(102).Thesefindingssupporttheconcept
7) (111). Elevenof 13 DLB patients butonly 2 of13 PDD
thatdementiainPDisassociatedwithimpairedfrontaland
caudate dopaminergic function. Reduced frontal 18F-dopa patients had significantly raised cortical amyloid levels.
These findings suggest that b-amyloid deposition does not
uptake has been previously reported in PD patients who
contribute significantlytothe pathogenesis ofPDD, inline
showed impaired performance on tests of verbal fluency,
with pathologic reports (112). Conversely, in DLB, in
verbal recall, and digit span (103).
which the dementia precedes or coincides with parkinson-
ism,anincreasein11C-PIBuptakeisseen inmostpatients
(113). It has been concluded that the presence of amyloid
Cholinergic Function
123I-iodobenzovesamicol SPECT is a marker of acetyl- acceleratesdementiainPDbutdoesnotappeartoinfluence
the nature of the symptomatology (114).
choline vesicle transporter binding in cholinergic nerve
terminals.Reducedbindingof123I-iodobenzovesamicolhas

Chunk 31:
 with parkinson-
ism,anincreasein11C-PIBuptakeisseen inmostpatients
(113). It has been concluded that the presence of amyloid
Cholinergic Function
123I-iodobenzovesamicol SPECT is a marker of acetyl- acceleratesdementiainPDbutdoesnotappeartoinfluence
the nature of the symptomatology (114).
choline vesicle transporter binding in cholinergic nerve
terminals.Reducedbindingof123I-iodobenzovesamicolhas In summary, dementia in PD is multifactorial, being
associated with cortical Lewy body disease, amyloid de-
been reported in the parietal and occipital cortex of non-
position, and loss of dopaminergic and cortical cholinergic
dementedPDpatients,andthisreductionspreadstoinvolve
transmission. Functional imaging can help determine the
all cortical areas in PD patients with dementia (104).
relativecontributionsofthesefactors inindividualpatients
Another biomarker of cholinergic integrity is levels of
andpotentiallyrationalizetheuseofantiamyloidstrategies.
acetylcholinesterase activity. This can be assessed with
N-11C-methylpiperidin-4-yl acetate (11C-MP4A) or 1-11C-
methylpiperidin-4-yl propionate (11C-PMP) PET, and cor- NEUROINFLAMMATION AND PD
tical binding of the former tracer has been reported to be Microglia constitute 10%220% of white cells in the
reducedby11%inPDandby30%inPDD(105).Levelsof brainandarenormallyinarestingstate.Achangeinbrain
cortical N-11C-methylpiperidin-4-yl acetate binding corre- milieu, such as that induced by injury or degeneration,
lated with levels of striatal 18F-dopa uptake in a combined causes them to become activated and release cytokines
groupofPDpatientswithandwithoutdementia,suggesting (115). The mitochondria of activated microglia express
that there is a parallel reduction in dopaminergic and translocator protein, previously known as the peripheral
cholinergic function in PD. 1-11C-methylpiperidin-4-yl benzodiazepinereceptor.Thiscanbedetectedwithavariety
propionate PET has revealed a significant correlation of PET ligands including the isoq

Chunk 32:
entswithandwithoutdementia,suggesting (115). The mitochondria of activated microglia express
that there is a parallel reduction in dopaminergic and translocator protein, previously known as the peripheral
cholinergic function in PD. 1-11C-methylpiperidin-4-yl benzodiazepinereceptor.Thiscanbedetectedwithavariety
propionate PET has revealed a significant correlation of PET ligands including the isoquinoline 11C-PK11195
between cortical acetylcholinesterase activity and perfor- (116).
manceontestsofattentioninacombinedgroupofPDand LossofsubstantianigraneuronsinPDhasbeenshownto
PDD patients (106). Interestingly, cortical acetylcholines- be associated with microglial activation (117). More re-
terase deficiency did not correlate with motor symptoms. cently, histochemical studies have shown that microglial
Taken together, these findings suggest that a deficiency of activation inend-stagePDiswidespread,beingseeninthe
cholinergictransmissioncontributestowardthedementiaof basal ganglia, cingulate, hippocampus, and cortical associ-
PD and lends support to the therapeutic use of cholinester- ationareas(118).11C-PK11195PEThasbeenusedtostudy
ase inhibitors. microglial activation in PD. Increased midbrain signal can
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 605

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
FIGURE 7. 11C-PIB PET images of
b-amyloid plaque load. Elderly healthy
subject and PDD patient show no
significant plaque deposition in brain,
comparedwith2DLBpatients,inwhom
amyloid deposition is extensive. (Cour-
tesyofPaulEdison.)
be detected, and this has been reported to correlate in- a sensitive marker of early PD, as up to 50% of Hoehn
versely with levels of posterior putamen 11C-CFT uptake, and Yahr stage 1 patients can still show normal tracer
a PET marker of DAT binding (119). Increased 11C- binding (124). Both 18F-dopamine and 123I-MIBG use
PK11195 uptake has also been reported in the medu

Chunk 33:
 (Cour-
tesyofPaulEdison.)
be detected, and this has been reported to correlate in- a sensitive marker of early PD, as up to 50% of Hoehn
versely with levels of posterior putamen 11C-CFT uptake, and Yahr stage 1 patients can still show normal tracer
a PET marker of DAT binding (119). Increased 11C- binding (124). Both 18F-dopamine and 123I-MIBG use
PK11195 uptake has also been reported in the medulla the same metabolic pathway as norepinephrine, and their
and pons, striatum, pallidum, and frontal cortex in PD myocardial uptake reflects not only the density of post-
(120), in line with the known distribution of Lewy body ganglionic sympathetic neurons but also their functional
pathology(Fig.8)(121).Overa2-yfollow-upperiod,little integrity.
changeinthelevelofmicroglialactivationwasseeninPD It has been suggested that cardiac sympathetic denerva-
although all patients deteriorated clinically. This observa- tion contributes to symptoms of autonomic failure such as
tion could imply that microglial activation is merely an orthostatic hypotension. Oka et al. (125) examined the
epiphenomenon in PD; however, postmortem studies have association between myocardial 123I-MIBG uptake and
shown that these cells continue to express cytokine mes- orthostatic hypotension, pulse, and blood pressure changes
senger RNA, suggesting that they could be driving disease during the Valsalva maneuver and erect and supine plasma
progression while their population remains static. norepinephrine concentrations in PD patients. Mean myo-
cardial 123I-MIBG uptake was significantly lower in PD
patients with orthostatic hypotension and an abnormal
IMAGINGCARDIAC SYMPATHETIC DENERVATION
Valsalva response. However, no association was found
INPD
between the fall in systolic blood pressure on head-up tilt
Several SPECTandPET studieshavereportedthatmost and baroreflex sensitivity or plasma norepinephrine con-
patients with idiopathic PD show a significant loss of centrations. These results indicate that car

Chunk 34:
rthostatic hypotension and an abnormal
IMAGINGCARDIAC SYMPATHETIC DENERVATION
Valsalva response. However, no association was found
INPD
between the fall in systolic blood pressure on head-up tilt
Several SPECTandPET studieshavereportedthatmost and baroreflex sensitivity or plasma norepinephrine con-
patients with idiopathic PD show a significant loss of centrations. These results indicate that cardiac sympathetic
sympathetic innervation of the heart whereas this is not dysfunction is a primary cause of impaired cardiovascular
a feature of atypical variants such as multiple-system reflexes in PD.
atrophy (122–124). Decreased myocardial uptake of the
sympatheticmarkers123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine(MIBG) CONCLUSION
and 18F-fluorodopamine has been reported in PD patients
StructuralchangesinPDnigracanbedetectedwithboth
even at early stages of the disease when cardiovascular
transcranial sonography and diffusion tensor MRI. Rather
reflexesarestillintact.However,123I-MIBGSPECTisnot
than reflecting the severity of disease, transcranial sonog-
raphy reveals a susceptibility to PD but can valuably
support the diagnosis. PET and SPECT measurements of
dopamine terminal function sensitively detect dopamine
deficiency in both symptomatic and at-risk subjects for
parkinsonian syndromes. Measures of striatal dopamine
deficiency correlate with bradykinesia and rigidity and
potentially provide biomarkers for monitoring disease pro-
gression.NormalstriatalDATbindinginapatientsuspected
ofhavingPDexcludesadopaminedeficiencysyndromeand
is associated with a good prognosis. Atypical parkinsonian
syndromes can be sensitively discriminated from PD with
either diffusion-weighted MRI or 18F-FDG PET.
FIGURE8. 11C-PK11195PETscansofhealthysubjectand DLB can be reliably discriminated from Alzheimer
PDpatient.Mildmicroglialactivationisseeninthalamusof disease by the presence of reduced striatal DAT binding.
healthy control, whereas significantly raised activation is Most DLB patients show a signific

Chunk 35:
ndromes can be sensitively discriminated from PD with
either diffusion-weighted MRI or 18F-FDG PET.
FIGURE8. 11C-PK11195PETscansofhealthysubjectand DLB can be reliably discriminated from Alzheimer
PDpatient.Mildmicroglialactivationisseeninthalamusof disease by the presence of reduced striatal DAT binding.
healthy control, whereas significantly raised activation is Most DLB patients show a significant amyloid load with
evident in midbrain and striata of PD patient. (Courtesy of 11C-PIB PET,whereasthis finding is less common inPDD
AlexGerhard.)
patients.
606 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
Extensive microglial activation can be detected in PD Parkinson variant of multiple system atrophy. Neurology. 2003;60:922–
with the translocator protein marker 11C-PK11195 PET, 927.
24. Nicoletti G, Lodi R, Condino F, et al. Apparent diffusion coefficient
providing a rationale for exploring the use of antiinflam-
measurements of the middle cerebellar peduncle differentiate the Parkinson
matory agents as potential neuroprotectants. variantofMSAfromParkinson’sdiseaseandprogressivesupranuclearpalsy.
Brain.2006;129:2679–2687.
25. PaviourDC,ThorntonJS,LeesAJ,JagerHR.Diffusion-weightedmagnetic
resonanceimagingdifferentiatesParkinsonianvariantofmultiple-systematrophy
fromprogressivesupranuclearpalsy.MovDisord.2007;22:68–74.
REFERENCES 26. WalterU,DresslerD,ProbstT,etal.Transcranialbrainsonographyfindingsin
discriminatingbetweenparkinsonismandidiopathicParkinsondisease.Arch
1. HughesAJ,DanielSE,LeesAJ.Improvedaccuracyofclinicaldiagnosisof
Neurol.2007;64:1635–1640.
LewybodyParkinson’sdisease.Neurology.2001;57:1497–1499.
27. BrooksDJ,FreyKA,MarekKL,etal.Assessmentofneuroimagingtechniques
2. SchneiderSA,EdwardsMJ,MirP,etal.Patientswithadult-onsetdystonic
as biomarkers of the progression of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol. 2003;
tremor resembling 

Chunk 36:
icParkinsondisease.Arch
1. HughesAJ,DanielSE,LeesAJ.Improvedaccuracyofclinicaldiagnosisof
Neurol.2007;64:1635–1640.
LewybodyParkinson’sdisease.Neurology.2001;57:1497–1499.
27. BrooksDJ,FreyKA,MarekKL,etal.Assessmentofneuroimagingtechniques
2. SchneiderSA,EdwardsMJ,MirP,etal.Patientswithadult-onsetdystonic
as biomarkers of the progression of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol. 2003;
tremor resembling parkinsonian tremor have scans without evidence of
184(suppl):S68–S79.
dopaminergicdeficit(SWEDDs).MovDisord.2007;22:2210–2215.
28. SawleGV,PlayfordED,BrooksDJ,QuinnN,FrackowiakRSJ.Asymmetrical
3. Fahn S.Parkinsondisease, theeffect oflevodopa,andthe ELLDOPAtrial.
presynaptic and postsynaptic changes in the striatal dopamine projection in
ArchNeurol.1999;56:529–535.
dopa-naive parkinsonism: diagnostic implications of the D2 receptor status.
4. WhoneAL,WattsRL,StoesslJ,etal.SlowerprogressionofPDwithropinirole
Brain.1993;116:853–867.
versusL-dopa:theREAL-PETstudy.AnnNeurol.2003;54:93–101.
29. Marek KL, Seibyl JP, Zoghbi SS, et al. [I-123] beta-CIT SPECT imaging
5. Geng DY, Li YX, Zee CS. Magnetic resonance imaging-based volumetric
demonstrates bilateral loss of dopamine transporters in hemi-Parkinson’s
analysis of basal ganglia nuclei and substantia nigra in patients with
disease.Neurology.1996;46:231–237.
Parkinson’sdisease.Neurosurgery.2006;58:256–262.
30. MorrishPK,SawleGV,BrooksDJ.Clinicaland[18F]dopaPETfindingsin
6. HutchinsonM,RaffU.StructuralchangesofthesubstantianigrainParkinson’s
earlyParkinson’sdisease.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.1995;59:597–600.
diseaseasrevealedbyMRimaging.AmJNeuroradiol.2000;21:697–701.
31. MarekK,InnisR,vanDyckC,etal.[123I]beta-CITSPECTimagingassessment
7. Hu MT, White SJ, Herlihy AH, Chaudhuri KR, Hajnal JV, Brooks DJ. A
comparisonof18F-dopaPETandinversionrecoveryMRIinthediagnosisof oftherateofParkinson’sdiseaseprogression.Neurology.2001;57:2089–2094.
32. Vingerhoets FJG, Schulzer M, Calne DB, SnowBJ. Which clinical sign of
Parkinson’sdisease.Neu

Chunk 37:
AmJNeuroradiol.2000;21:697–701.
31. MarekK,InnisR,vanDyckC,etal.[123I]beta-CITSPECTimagingassessment
7. Hu MT, White SJ, Herlihy AH, Chaudhuri KR, Hajnal JV, Brooks DJ. A
comparisonof18F-dopaPETandinversionrecoveryMRIinthediagnosisof oftherateofParkinson’sdiseaseprogression.Neurology.2001;57:2089–2094.
32. Vingerhoets FJG, Schulzer M, Calne DB, SnowBJ. Which clinical sign of
Parkinson’sdisease.Neurology.2001;56:1195–1200.
Parkinson’s disease best reflects the nigrostriatal lesion? Ann Neurol. 1997;
8. MinatiL,GrisoliM,CarellaF,DeSimoneT,BruzzoneMG,SavoiardoM.
41:58–64.
Imaging degeneration of the substantia nigra in Parkinson disease with
inversion-recoveryMRimaging.AmJNeuroradiol.2007;28:309–313. 33. BenamerHTS,PattersonJ,WyperDJ,HadleyDM,MacpheeGJA,GrossetDG.
9. Michaeli S, Oz G, Sorce DJ, et al. Assessment of brain iron and neuronal Correlation of Parkinson’s disease severity and duration with I-123-FP-CIT
integrityinpatientswithParkinson’sdiseaseusingnovelMRIcontrasts.Mov SPECTstriataluptake.MovDisord.2000;15:692–698.
Disord.2007;22:334–340. 34. Seibyl JP, Marek KL, Quinlan D, et al. Decreased single-photon emission
10. Vaillancourt DE, Spraker MB, Prodoehl J, et al. High-resolution diffusion computed tomographic [123I]b-CIT striatal uptake correlates with symptom
tensorimaginginthesubstantianigraofdenovoParkinsondisease.Neurology. severityinParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.1995;38:589–598.
2009;72:1378–1384. 35. Whone AL, Moore RY,Piccini P,Brooks DJ.Plasticity in the nigropallidal
11. Berg D, Siefker C, Becker G. Echogenicity of the substantia nigra in pathway in Parkinson’s disease: an 18F-dopa PET study. Ann Neurol. 2003;
Parkinson’sdiseaseanditsrelationtoclinicalfindings.JNeurol.2001;248: 53:206–213.
684–689. 36. Benamer TS, Patterson J, Grosset DG, et al. Accurate differentiation of
12. BergD,MerzB,ReinersK,NaumannM,BeckerG.Five-yearfollow-upstudy parkinsonism and essential tremor using visual assessment of [123I]-FP-CIT
of hyperechogenicity of the substantia 

Chunk 38:
n’s disease: an 18F-dopa PET study. Ann Neurol. 2003;
Parkinson’sdiseaseanditsrelationtoclinicalfindings.JNeurol.2001;248: 53:206–213.
684–689. 36. Benamer TS, Patterson J, Grosset DG, et al. Accurate differentiation of
12. BergD,MerzB,ReinersK,NaumannM,BeckerG.Five-yearfollow-upstudy parkinsonism and essential tremor using visual assessment of [123I]-FP-CIT
of hyperechogenicity of the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease. Mov imaging:The[123I]-FP-CITStudyGroup.MovDisord.2000;15:503–510.
Disord.2005;20:383–385. 37. JenningsDL,SeibylJP,OakesD,EberlyS,MurphyJ,MarekK.(123I)beta-CIT
13. BergD,RoggendorfW,SchroderU,etal.Echogenicityofthesubstantianigra: and single-photon emission computed tomographic imaging vs clinical
association with increased iron content and marker for susceptibility to evaluation in Parkinsonian syndrome: unmasking an early diagnosis. Arch
nigrostriatalinjury.ArchNeurol.2002;59:999–1005. Neurol.2004;61:1224–1229.
14. WalterU,KleinC,HilkerR,BeneckeR,PramstallerPP,DresslerD.Brain 38. Marshall VL, Reininger CB, Marquardt M, et al. Parkinson’s disease is
parenchyma sonography detects preclinical parkinsonism. Mov Disord. overdiagnosedclinicallyatbaselineindiagnosticallyuncertaincases:a3-year
2004;19:1445–1449. European multicenter study with repeat [123I]FP-CIT SPECT. Mov Disord.
15. Schweitzer KJ, Brussel T, Leitner P, et al. Transcranial ultrasound in dif- 2009;24:500–508.
ferentmonogeneticsubtypesofParkinson’sdisease.JNeurol.2007;254:613– 39. Catafau AM, Tolosa E. Impact of dopamine transporter SPECTusing 123I-
616. Ioflupaneondiagnosisandmanagementofpatientswithclinicallyuncertain
16. Gaenslen A, Unmuth B, Godau J, et al. The specificity and sensitivity of Parkinsoniansyndromes.MovDisord.2004;19:1175–1182.
transcranial ultrasound in the differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: 40. Tolosa E, Borght TV, Moreno E. Accuracy of DaTSCAN (123I-Ioflupane)
aprospectiveblindedstudy.LancetNeurol.2008;7:417–424. SPECTindiagnosisofpatientswithclinicall

Chunk 39:
ientswithclinicallyuncertain
16. Gaenslen A, Unmuth B, Godau J, et al. The specificity and sensitivity of Parkinsoniansyndromes.MovDisord.2004;19:1175–1182.
transcranial ultrasound in the differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: 40. Tolosa E, Borght TV, Moreno E. Accuracy of DaTSCAN (123I-Ioflupane)
aprospectiveblindedstudy.LancetNeurol.2008;7:417–424. SPECTindiagnosisofpatientswithclinicallyuncertainparkinsonism:2-year
17. VlaarAM,deNijsT,vanKroonenburghMJ,etal.Thepredictivevalueof follow-upofanopen-labelstudy.MovDisord.2007;22:2346–2351.
transcranial duplex sonography for the clinical diagnosis in undiagnosed 41. MarshallVL,PattersonJ,HadleyDM,GrossetKA,GrossetDG.Two-yearfollow-
parkinsonian syndromes: comparison with SPECT scans. BMC Neurol. upin150consecutivecaseswithnormaldopaminetransporterimaging.NuclMed
2008;8:42. Commun.2006;27:933–937.
18. Stockner H, Sojer M, K KS, et al. Midbrain sonography in patients with 42. Marshall VL, Patterson J, Hadley DM, Grosset KA, Grosset DG. Successful
essentialtremor.MovDisord.2007;22:414–417. antiparkinsonianmedicationwithdrawalinpatientswithparkinsonismandnormal
19. WalterU,HoeppnerJ,Prudente-MorrisseyL,HorowskiS,HerpertzSC,Benecke FP-CITSPECT.MovDisord.2006;21:2247–2250.
R.Parkinson’sdisease-likemidbrainsonographyabnormalitiesarefrequentin 43. BrooksDJ.Functionalimaginginrelationtoparkinsoniansyndromes.JNeurol
depressivedisorders.Brain.2007;130:1799–1807. Sci.1993;115:1–17.
20. SchulzJB,SkalejM,WedekindD,etal.Magneticresonanceimaging-based 44. Eidelberg D, Moeller JR, Dhawan V, et al. The metabolic topography of
volumetrydifferentiatesidiopathicParkinson’ssyndromefrommultiplesystem parkinsonism.JCerebBloodFlowMetab.1994;14:783–801.
atrophyandprogressivesupranuclearpalsy.AnnNeurol.1999;45:65–74. 45. SuPC,MaY,FukudaM,etal.Metabolicchangesfollowingsubthalamotomy
21. Paviour DC, Price SL, Jahanshahi M, Lees AJ, Fox NC. Regional brain foradvancedParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.2001;50:514–520.
volumes distinguish PSP, MSA-

Chunk 40:
ifferentiatesidiopathicParkinson’ssyndromefrommultiplesystem parkinsonism.JCerebBloodFlowMetab.1994;14:783–801.
atrophyandprogressivesupranuclearpalsy.AnnNeurol.1999;45:65–74. 45. SuPC,MaY,FukudaM,etal.Metabolicchangesfollowingsubthalamotomy
21. Paviour DC, Price SL, Jahanshahi M, Lees AJ, Fox NC. Regional brain foradvancedParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.2001;50:514–520.
volumes distinguish PSP, MSA-P, and PD: MRI-based clinico-radiological 46. Feigin A, Fukuda M, Dhawan V, et al. Metabolic correlates of levodopa
correlations.MovDisord.2006;21:989–996. responseinParkinson’sdisease.Neurology.2001;57:2083–2088.
22. Schocke MF, Seppi K, Esterhammer R, et al. Diffusion-weighted MRI 47. EckertT,FeiginA,LewisDE,DhawanV,FruchtS,EidelbergD.Regional
differentiates the Parkinson variant of multiple system atrophy from PD. metabolicchangesinparkinsonianpatientswithnormaldopaminergicimaging.
Neurology.2002;58:575–580. MovDisord.2007;22:167–173.
23. SeppiK, Schocke MF,Esterhammer R, etal. Diffusion-weightedimaging 48. Burn DJ, Sawle GV, Brooks DJ. The differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s
discriminates progressive supranuclear palsy from PD, but not from the disease,multiplesystematrophy,andSteele-Richardson-Olszewskisyndrome:
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 607

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
discriminant analysis of striatal 18F-dopa PET data. J Neurol Neurosurg 72. Laruelle M. Imaging synaptic neurotransmission with in vivo binding
Psychiatry.1994;57:278–284. competitiontechniques:acriticalreview.JCerebBloodFlowMetab.2000;20:
49. PirkerW,AsenbaumS,BencsitsG,etal.[I-123]beta-CITSPECTinmultiple 423–451.
systematrophy,progressivesupranuclearpalsy,andcorticobasaldegeneration. 73. BreierA,SuTP,SaundersR,etal.Schizophreniaisassociatedwithelevated
MovDisord.2000;15:1158–1167. amphetamine-inducedsynapticdopamineconcentrations:evidencefromnovel
50. Messa C, Volonte MA, Fazio F, et al. D

Chunk 41:
ticalreview.JCerebBloodFlowMetab.2000;20:
49. PirkerW,AsenbaumS,BencsitsG,etal.[I-123]beta-CITSPECTinmultiple 423–451.
systematrophy,progressivesupranuclearpalsy,andcorticobasaldegeneration. 73. BreierA,SuTP,SaundersR,etal.Schizophreniaisassociatedwithelevated
MovDisord.2000;15:1158–1167. amphetamine-inducedsynapticdopamineconcentrations:evidencefromnovel
50. Messa C, Volonte MA, Fazio F, et al. Differential distribution of striatal positron emission tomography method. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997;94:
[123I]b-CIT in Parkinson’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy, 2569–2574.
evaluated with single-photon emission tomography. Eur J Nucl Med. 1998; 74. PaveseN,EvansAH,TaiYF,etal.Clinicalcorrelatesoflevodopa-induced
25:1270–1276. dopaminereleaseinParkinsondisease:aPETstudy.Neurology.2006;67:1612–
51. Sawle GV, Brooks DJ, Marsden CD, Frackowiak RSJ. Corticobasal de- 1617.
generation:auniquepatternofregionalcorticaloxygenmetabolismandstriatal 75. TorstensonR,HartvigP,La˚ngstro¨mB,WesterbergG,TedroffJ.Differential
fluorodopa uptake demonstrated by positron emission tomography. Brain. effects of levodopa on dopaminergic function in early and advanced
1991;114:541–556. Parkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.1997;41:334–340.
52. Eidelberg D, Takikawa S, Moeller JR, et al. Striatal hypometabolism 76. DelaFuente-FernandezR,LuJQ,SossiV,etal.Biochemicalvariationsinthe
distinguishesstriatonigraldegenerationfromParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol. synapticlevelofdopamineprecedemotorfluctuationsinParkinson’sdisease:
1993;33:518–527. PETevidenceofincreaseddopamineturnover.AnnNeurol.2001;49:298–303.
53. EidelbergD,DhawanV,MoellerJR,etal.Themetaboliclandscapeofcortico- 77. Brotchie JM. Advances in understanding the neural mechanisms underlying
basal ganglionic degeneration: regional asymmetries studied with positron L-DOPA-induceddyskinesia.AdvNeurol.1999;80:71–85.
emissiontomography.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.1991;54:856–862. 78. Piccini P, Weeks RA, Brooks DJ. Opioid receptor binding in Parkin

Chunk 42:
. EidelbergD,DhawanV,MoellerJR,etal.Themetaboliclandscapeofcortico- 77. Brotchie JM. Advances in understanding the neural mechanisms underlying
basal ganglionic degeneration: regional asymmetries studied with positron L-DOPA-induceddyskinesia.AdvNeurol.1999;80:71–85.
emissiontomography.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.1991;54:856–862. 78. Piccini P, Weeks RA, Brooks DJ. Opioid receptor binding in Parkinson’s
54. EckertT,BarnesA,DhawanV,etal.FDGPETinthedifferentialdiagnosisof patients with and without levodopa-induced dyskinesias. Ann Neurol.
parkinsoniandisorders.Neuroimage.2005;26:912–921. 1997;42:720–726.
55. GolbeLI.ThegeneticsofParkinson’sdisease:areconsideration.Neurology. 79. Whone AL, Rabiner EA, Arahata Y, Luthra SK, Hargreaves R, Brooks DJ.
1990;40(suppl3):7–16. ReducedsubstancePbindinginParkinson’sdiseasecomplicatedbydyskinesias:
56. PicciniP,MorrishPK,TurjanskiN,etal.Dopaminergicfunctioninfamilial anF-18-L829165PETstudy[abstract].Neurology.2002;58(suppl3):A488–A489.
Parkinson’s disease: a clinical and 18F-dopa PET study. Ann Neurol. 1997; 80. BurnDJ.Beyondtheironmask:towardsbetterrecognitionandtreatmentof
41:222–229. depressionassociatedwithParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2002;17:445–454.
57. Hilker R, Klein C, Hedrich K, et al. The striatal dopaminergic deficit is 81. AgidY,RubergM,RaismanR,HirschE,Javoy-AgidF.Thebiochemistryof
dependentonthenumberofmutantallelesinafamilywithmutationsinthe Parkinson’s disease. In: Stern GM, ed. Parkinson’s Disease. London, U.K.:
parkingene:evidenceforenzymaticparkinfunctioninhumans.NeurosciLett. ChapmanandHallMedical;1990:99–125.
2002;323:50–54. 82. LaruelleM,BaldwinRM,MalisonRT,etal.SPECTimagingofdopamineand
58. KhanNL,BrooksDJ,PaveseN,etal.Progressionofnigrostriataldysfunction serotonintransporterswith[123I]beta-CIT:pharmacologicalcharacterizationof
in a parkin kindred: an [18F]dopa PET and clinical study. Brain. brainuptakeinnonhumanprimates.Synapse.1993;13:295–309.
2002;125:2248–2256. 83. KimSE,ChoiJY,ChoeYS,ChoiY,LeeWY.Serot

Chunk 43:
3:50–54. 82. LaruelleM,BaldwinRM,MalisonRT,etal.SPECTimagingofdopamineand
58. KhanNL,BrooksDJ,PaveseN,etal.Progressionofnigrostriataldysfunction serotonintransporterswith[123I]beta-CIT:pharmacologicalcharacterizationof
in a parkin kindred: an [18F]dopa PET and clinical study. Brain. brainuptakeinnonhumanprimates.Synapse.1993;13:295–309.
2002;125:2248–2256. 83. KimSE,ChoiJY,ChoeYS,ChoiY,LeeWY.Serotonintransportersinthe
59. Scherfler C, Khan NL, Pavese N, et al. Striatal and cortical pre- and midbrainofParkinson’sdiseasepatients:astudywith123I-beta-CITSPECT.
postsynapticdopaminergicdysfunctioninsporadicparkin-linkedparkinsonism. JNuclMed.2003;44:870–876.
Brain.2004;127:1332–1342. 84. Doder M, Rabiner EA, Turjanski N, Lees AJ, Brooks DJ. Brain serotonin
60. KhanNL,ScherflerC,GrahamE,etal.Dopaminergicdysfunctioninunrelated, HT1AreceptorsinParkinson’sdiseasewithandwithoutdepressionmeasured
asymptomaticcarriersofasingleparkinmutation.Neurology.2005;64:134– bypositronemissiontomographyand11C-WAY100635[abstract].MovDisord.
136. 2000;15(suppl3):213.
61. Adams JR, van Netten H, Schulzer M, et al. PET in LRRK2 mutations: 85. RemyP,DoderM,LeesAJ,TurjanskiN,BrooksDJ.DepressioninParkinson’s
comparisontosporadicParkinson’sdiseaseandevidenceforpresymptomatic disease:lossofdopamineandnoradrenalineinnervationinthelimbicsystem.
compensation.Brain.2005;128:2777–2785. Brain.2005;128:1314–1322.
62. Lee CS, Samii A, Sossi V, et al. In vivo positron emission tomographic 86. Cilia R, Siri C, Marotta G, et al. Functional abnormalities underlying
evidence for compensatory changes in presynaptic dopaminergic nerve pathologicalgamblinginParkinsondisease.ArchNeurol.2008;65:1604–1611.
terminalsinParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.2000;47:493–503. 87. SteevesTD,MiyasakiJ,ZurowskiM,etal.Increasedstriataldopaminerelease
63. PonsenMM,StoffersD,BooijJ,VanEck-SmitBL,WoltersE,BerendseHW. inparkinsonianpatientswithpathologicalgambling:a[11C]raclopridePET
IdiopathichyposmiaasapreclinicalsignofParkinson’sdisease

Chunk 44:
inergic nerve pathologicalgamblinginParkinsondisease.ArchNeurol.2008;65:1604–1611.
terminalsinParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.2000;47:493–503. 87. SteevesTD,MiyasakiJ,ZurowskiM,etal.Increasedstriataldopaminerelease
63. PonsenMM,StoffersD,BooijJ,VanEck-SmitBL,WoltersE,BerendseHW. inparkinsonianpatientswithpathologicalgambling:a[11C]raclopridePET
IdiopathichyposmiaasapreclinicalsignofParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol. study.Brain.2009;132:1376–1385.
2004;56:173–181. 88. Emre M. Dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol.
64. EisensehrI,LinkeR,NoachtarS,SchwarzJ,GildehausFJ,TatschK.Reduced 2003;2:229–237.
striatal dopamine transporters in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep 89. Hely MA, Reid WG, Adena MA, Halliday GM, Morris JG. The Sydney
behaviourdisorder:comparisonwithParkinson’sdiseaseandcontrols.Brain. multicenterstudyofParkinson’sdisease:theinevitabilityofdementiaat20
2000;123:1155–1160. years.MovDisord.2008;23:837–844.
65. Stiasny-KolsterK,DoerrY,MollerJC,etal.Combinationof‘idiopathic’REM 90. SummerfieldC,JunqueC,TolosaE,etal.StructuralbrainchangesinParkinson
sleep behaviour disorder and olfactory dysfunction as possible indicator for disease with dementia: a voxel-based morphometry study. Arch Neurol.
alpha-synucleinopathydemonstratedbydopaminetransporterFP-CIT-SPECT. 2005;62:281–285.
Brain.2005;128:126–137. 91. Ramirez-RuizB,MartiMJ,TolosaE,etal.Longitudinalevaluationofcerebral
66. Sommer U, Hummel T, Cormann K, et al. Detection of presymptomatic morphological changesin Parkinson’sdiseasewith and without dementia. J
Parkinson’s disease: combining smell tests, transcranial sonography, and Neurol.2005;252:1345–1352.
SPECT.MovDisord.2004;19:1196–1202. 92. Burton EJ, McKeith IG, Burn DJ, O’Brien JT. Brain atrophy rates in
67. SpiegelJ,HellwigD,MollersMO,etal.Transcranialsonographyand[123I]FP- Parkinson’sdiseasewithandwithoutdementiausingserialmagneticresonance
CIT SPECT disclose complementary aspects of Parkinson’s disease. Brain. imaging.MovDisord.2005;2

Chunk 45:
 transcranial sonography, and Neurol.2005;252:1345–1352.
SPECT.MovDisord.2004;19:1196–1202. 92. Burton EJ, McKeith IG, Burn DJ, O’Brien JT. Brain atrophy rates in
67. SpiegelJ,HellwigD,MollersMO,etal.Transcranialsonographyand[123I]FP- Parkinson’sdiseasewithandwithoutdementiausingserialmagneticresonance
CIT SPECT disclose complementary aspects of Parkinson’s disease. Brain. imaging.MovDisord.2005;20:1571–1576.
2006;129:1188–1193. 93. Peppard RF, Martin WRW, Carr GD, et al. Cerebral glucose metabolism in
68. de la Fuente-Ferna´ndez R, Pal PK, Vingerhoets FJG, et al. Evidence for Parkinson’s-diseasewithandwithoutdementia.ArchNeurol.1992;49:1262–1268.
impairedpresynapticdopaminefunctioninparkinsonianpatientswithmotor 94. Vander-Borght T, Minoshima S, Giordani B, et al. Cerebral metabolic
fluctuations.JNeuralTransm.2000;107:49–57. differences in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease matched for dementia
69. PlayfordED,BrooksDJ.Invivoandinvitrostudiesofthedopaminergicsystem severity.JNuclMed.1997;38:797–802.
inmovementdisorders.CerebrovascBrainMetabRev.1992;4:144–171. 95. Hoffman JM, Welsh-Bohmer KA, Hanson M, et al. FDG PET imaging in
70. Antonini A, Schwarz J, Oertel WH, Beer HF, Madeja UD, Leenders KL. patientswithpathologicallyverifieddementia.JNuclMed.2000;41:1920–1928.
[11C]raclopride and positron emission tomography in previously untreated 96. HuMTM,Taylor-RobinsonSD,ChaudhuriKR,etal.Corticaldysfunctionin
patientswithParkinson’sdisease:influenceofL-dopaandlisuridetherapyon non-dementedParkinson’sdiseasepatients:acombined31phosphorusMRSand
striataldopamineD2-receptors.Neurology.1994;44:1325–1329. 18FDGPETstudy.Brain.2000;123:340–352.
71. Turjanski N, Lees AJ, Brooks DJ. PET studies on striatal dopaminergic 97. AlbinRL,MinoshimaS,D’AmatoCJ,FreyKA,KuhlDA,SimaAA.Fluoro-
receptorbindingindrugnaiveandL-dopatreatedParkinson’sdiseasepatients deoxyglucose positron emission tomography in diffuse Lewy body disease.
withandwithoutdyskinesia.Neurology.1997;49:717–723. Neurology.1

Chunk 46:
gy.1994;44:1325–1329. 18FDGPETstudy.Brain.2000;123:340–352.
71. Turjanski N, Lees AJ, Brooks DJ. PET studies on striatal dopaminergic 97. AlbinRL,MinoshimaS,D’AmatoCJ,FreyKA,KuhlDA,SimaAA.Fluoro-
receptorbindingindrugnaiveandL-dopatreatedParkinson’sdiseasepatients deoxyglucose positron emission tomography in diffuse Lewy body disease.
withandwithoutdyskinesia.Neurology.1997;49:717–723. Neurology.1996;47:462–466.
608 THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 51 • No. 4 • April 2010

---PAGE BREAK---

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by University of Turku on June 4, 2014. For personal use only.
98. Walker Z, Costa DC, Walker RW, et al. Differentiation of dementia with 112. Aarsland D, Perry R, Brown A, Larsen JP, Ballard C. Neuropathology of
Lewy bodies from Alzheimer’s disease using a dopaminergic presynaptic dementiainParkinson’sdisease:aprospective,community-basedstudy.Ann
ligand.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.2002;73:134–140. Neurol.2005;58:773–776.
99. WalkerZ,JarosE,WalkerRW,etal.DementiawithLewybodies:acomparison 113. RoweCC,NgS,AckermannU,etal.Imagingbeta-amyloidburdeninagingand
ofclinicaldiagnosis,FP-CITSPECTimagingandautopsy.JNeurolNeurosurg dementia.Neurology.2007;68:1718–1725.
Psychiatry.2007;78:1176–1181. 114. GompertsSN,RentzDM,MoranE,etal.ImagingamyloiddepositioninLewy
100. O’BrienJT,McKeithIG,WalkerZ,etal.Diagnosticaccuracyof123I-FP-CIT bodydiseases.Neurology.2008;71:903–910.
SPECTin possible dementia with Lewy bodies. Br J Psychiatry. 2009;194: 115. KreutzbergGW.Microglia:asensorforpathologicaleventsintheCNS.Trends
34–39. Neurosci.1996;19:312–318.
101. O’BrienJT,CollobyS,FenwickJ,etal.Dopaminetransporterlossvisualized 116. DoorduinJ,deVriesEF,DierckxRA,KleinHC.PETimagingoftheperipheral
with FP-CIT SPECT in the differential diagnosis of dementia with Lewy benzodiazepinereceptor:monitoringdiseaseprogressionandtherapyresponse
bodies.ArchNeurol.2004;61:919–925. inneurodegenerativedisorders.CurrPharmDes.2008;14:3297–3315.
102. ItoK,Nagano-SaitoA,KatoT,etal.St

Chunk 47:
,CollobyS,FenwickJ,etal.Dopaminetransporterlossvisualized 116. DoorduinJ,deVriesEF,DierckxRA,KleinHC.PETimagingoftheperipheral
with FP-CIT SPECT in the differential diagnosis of dementia with Lewy benzodiazepinereceptor:monitoringdiseaseprogressionandtherapyresponse
bodies.ArchNeurol.2004;61:919–925. inneurodegenerativedisorders.CurrPharmDes.2008;14:3297–3315.
102. ItoK,Nagano-SaitoA,KatoT,etal.Striatalandextrastriataldysfunctionin 117. McGeerPL,ItagakiS,BoyesBE,McGeerEG.Reactivemicrogliaarepositive
Parkinson’sdiseasewithdementia:a6-[18F]fluoro-L-dopaPETstudy.Brain. forHLA-DRin thesubstantia nigraofParkinson’sandAlzheimer’sdisease
2002;125:1358–1365. brains.Neurology.1988;38:1285–1291.
103. Rinne JO, Portin R, Ruottinen H, et al. Cognitive impairment and the brain 118. ImamuraK,HishikawaN,SawadaM,NagatsuT,YoshidaM,HashizumeY.
dopaminergic system in Parkinson disease: [18F]fluorodopa positron emission Distribution of major histocompatibility complex class II-positive microglia
tomographicstudy.ArchNeurol.2000;57:470–475. and cytokine profile of Parkinson’s disease brains. Acta Neuropathol.
104. Kuhl DE, Minoshima S, Fessler JA, et al. In vivo mapping of cholinergic 2003;106:518–526.
terminalsinnormalaging,Alzheimer’sdisease,andParkinson’sdisease.Ann 119. OuchiY,YoshikawaE,SekineY,etal.Microglialactivationanddopamine
Neurol.1996;40:399–410. terminallossinearlyParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol.2005;57:168–175.
105. HilkerR,ThomasAV,KleinJC,etal.DementiainParkinsondisease:functional 120. GerhardA,PaveseN,HottonGR,etal.MicroglialactivationinParkinson’s
imagingofcholinergicanddopaminergicpathways.Neurology.2005;65:1716–1722. disease: its longitudinal course and correlation with clinical parameters: an
106. BohnenNI,KauferDI,HendricksonR,etal.Cognitivecorrelatesofcortical [11C](R)-PK11195PETstudy[abstract].Neurology.2004;62(suppl):A432.
cholinergicdenervation in Parkinson’sdisease and parkinsonian dementia. J 121. BraakH,TrediciKD,RubU,deVosRA,JansenSteurEN,BraakE.Stagingof
Neu

Chunk 48:
rgicpathways.Neurology.2005;65:1716–1722. disease: its longitudinal course and correlation with clinical parameters: an
106. BohnenNI,KauferDI,HendricksonR,etal.Cognitivecorrelatesofcortical [11C](R)-PK11195PETstudy[abstract].Neurology.2004;62(suppl):A432.
cholinergicdenervation in Parkinson’sdisease and parkinsonian dementia. J 121. BraakH,TrediciKD,RubU,deVosRA,JansenSteurEN,BraakE.Stagingof
Neurol.2006;253:242–247. brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging.
107. LeePH,YongSW,AnYS.Changesincerebralglucosemetabolisminpatients 2003;24:197–211.
withParkinsondiseasewithdementiaaftercholinesteraseinhibitortherapy.J 122. GoldsteinDS,HolmesC,LiST,BruceS,MetmanLV,CannonROIII.Cardiac
NuclMed.2008;49:2006–2011. sympatheticdenervationinParkinsondisease.AnnInternMed.2000;133:338–
108. BacskaiBJ,FroschMP,FreemanSH,etal.MolecularimagingwithPittsburgh 347.
CompoundBconfirmedatautopsy:acasereport.ArchNeurol.2007;64:431– 123. SpiegelJ,MollersMO,JostWH,etal.FP-CITandMIBGscintigraphyinearly
434. Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2005;20:552–561.
109. KlunkWE,EnglerH,NordbergA,etal.ImagingbrainamyloidinAlzheimer’s 124. TakatsuH,NagashimaK,MuraseM,etal.DifferentiatingParkinsondisease
diseasewithPittsburghCompound-B.AnnNeurol.2004;55:306–319. frommultiple-systematrophybymeasuringcardiaciodine-123metaiodoben-
110. EdisonP,ArcherHA,HinzR,etal.Amyloid,hypometabolism,andcognition zylguanidineaccumulation.JAMA.2000;284:44–45.
in Alzheimer disease: an [11C]PIB and [18F]FDG PET study. Neurology. 125. Oka H, Yoshioka M, Onouchi K, et al. Characteristics of orthostatic
2007;68:501–508. hypotensioninParkinson’sdisease.Brain.2007;130:2425–2432.
111. Edison P, Rowe CC, Rinne JO, et al. Amyloid load in Parkinson’s disease 126. Vaillancourt DE, Spraker MB, Prodoehl J, et al. High-resolution diffusion
dementiaandLewybodydementiameasuredwith[11C]PIBpositronemission tensorimaginginthesubstantianigraofdenovoParkinsondisease.Neurology.
tomography.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.2008;

Chunk 49:
:501–508. hypotensioninParkinson’sdisease.Brain.2007;130:2425–2432.
111. Edison P, Rowe CC, Rinne JO, et al. Amyloid load in Parkinson’s disease 126. Vaillancourt DE, Spraker MB, Prodoehl J, et al. High-resolution diffusion
dementiaandLewybodydementiameasuredwith[11C]PIBpositronemission tensorimaginginthesubstantianigraofdenovoParkinsondisease.Neurology.
tomography.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry.2008;79:1331–1338. 2009;72:1378–1384.
IMAGING APPROACHES TO PARKINSON DISEASE • Brooks 609

---PAGE BREAK---



