Chunk 1:
Anniversary Round-up
Major advances in Parkinson’s disease over the past
two decades and future research directions
Developments in levodopa formulations and the promising biomarkers for neurodegeneration,4 but
standardisation of deep brain stimulation (DBS) require confirmatory evidence. Another highly relevant
substantially improved clinical management of patients development is that of new PET tracers; serotoninergic
with Parkinson’s disease before the turn of the century. and cholinergic systems have been extensively
As a result of these developments, Parkinson’s disease investigated and their contribution to motor and non-
has become a chronic disorder and it is associated with motor features and prodromal abnormalities has been
a plethora of non-motor disabling complications. identified.5 Moreover, assessment of dopaminergic
Cognitive impairment is now a major complication of ter minals in vivo has enabled the identification of a
Parkinson’s disease.1 Patients gradually develop from negative exponential progression pattern of dopa-
being cognitively normal, to having mild cognitive minergic loss in the striatum,6 patterned topo-
impairment and then dementia as part of a continuum graphical progression of striatal denervation,7 and
of progressive pathological changes in the brain, early involvement of axonal terminals. Finally, the
including misfolded protein deposition and neuronal use of fluorodeoxyglucose-PET to monitor metabolic
loss.2 Gait dysfunction, leading to an inability to walk, changes has been validated as a promising diagnostic
is another major complication associated with long- and prognostic biomarker.8 Additionally, initial evidence
term disease progression. Moreover, dysautonomia on amyloid and tau PET has also been reported in the
(eg, urinary dysfunction, constipation, and blood past few years; however, the greatest expectation is for
pressure dysregulation) can affect quality of life. These the use of α-synuclein PET tracers, and studies te

Chunk 2:
on associated with long- and prognostic biomarker.8 Additionally, initial evidence
term disease progression. Moreover, dysautonomia on amyloid and tau PET has also been reported in the
(eg, urinary dysfunction, constipation, and blood past few years; however, the greatest expectation is for
pressure dysregulation) can affect quality of life. These the use of α-synuclein PET tracers, and studies testing
and other manifestations mean that Parkinson’s disease the first human α-synuclein binding compounds are
is now a chronic multisystem disorder (figure). ongoing.9
Since the discovery of mutations in the synuclein Plasma biomarkers are another important area of
(SNCA) and parkin (PRKN) genes, several other genes research, although with few validated results to date.
have been linked to risk of Parkinson’s disease;3 Neurofilament light chain (NfL) and α-synuclein are the
however, only LRRK2, VPS35, PINK1, DJ1, and GBA1 most promising biomarkers. NfL is increased in blood
have been convincingly associated with the disease. and CSF in people with Parkinson’s disease, although its
Genetic data show that disease mechanisms converge sensitivity and specificity for use in individual patients are
in common pathways involving dysfunction of low. α-Synuclein has been investigated as a diagnostic
lysosomal, mitochondrial, synaptic, and endosomal and prognostic biomarker in several bodily fluids and
vesicles and protein recycling. Notably, the monogenic tissues, although the most consistent results have been
loci recognised to date explain only a small fraction obtained in CSF. New methods using α-synuclein seed
of the familial cases. Some genetic forms (ie, PRKN, amplification assays are highly accurate, but their clinical
PINK1, and LRRK2) underscore the challenge of standardisation is still pending.
understanding selective neuronal vulnerability and The past 20 years have witnessed an explosion of
why a ubiquitous cellular dysfunction is deleterious for data regarding the role 

Chunk 3:
s using α-synuclein seed
of the familial cases. Some genetic forms (ie, PRKN, amplification assays are highly accurate, but their clinical
PINK1, and LRRK2) underscore the challenge of standardisation is still pending.
understanding selective neuronal vulnerability and The past 20 years have witnessed an explosion of
why a ubiquitous cellular dysfunction is deleterious for data regarding the role of α-synuclein aggregation in
a subset of dopaminergic neurons. When a ubiquitous cell death, the spreading of the presumed toxic species,
genetic defect affects preferentially the neurons of the and the concept of a peripheral onset of Lewy body
substantia nigra, in a process that begins unilaterally, pathology. Braak and colleagues suggested a model
then the gene defect cannot explain, per se, the onset of whereby abnormal synuclein deposition starts in the
neurodegeneration. olfactory tract and the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve,
Neuroimaging has also had extraordinary growth and ascends gradually to affect the substantia nigra pars
over the past 20 years, with advances in both structural compacta, the amygdala, and the cortex.10 Furthermore,
and functional imaging. MRI sequences to assess iron, they found that α-synuclein deposition can also occur in
neuromelanin, and free-water imaging have become peripheral nerves in the autonomic system (ie, in the gut,
1076 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 21 December 2022

---PAGE BREAK---

Anniversary Round-up
Chromosome
Largest GWASmeta-analysis identified
a total of 90 loci associated with risk of
Parkinson's disease
STN and GPi LRRK2 mutation AAV-GAD trial Identification Automated Gut microbes
deep-brain as a risk factor in patients with of first GWAS assessment of promote
stimulation of Parkinson's Parkinson's loci associated bradykinesia α-synuclein-
for motor disease disease with risk of mediated motor Skin α-synuclein
fluctuations Parkinson's disease deficits and brain RT-QuiC diagnostic value
pathology
2002 2003 2004 200

Chunk 4:
 mutation AAV-GAD trial Identification Automated Gut microbes
deep-brain as a risk factor in patients with of first GWAS assessment of promote
stimulation of Parkinson's Parkinson's loci associated bradykinesia α-synuclein-
for motor disease disease with risk of mediated motor Skin α-synuclein
fluctuations Parkinson's disease deficits and brain RT-QuiC diagnostic value
pathology
2002 2003 2004 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 2021 2022
Aggregation, Levodopa plus GBA1 Metabolic Molecularly Brain-first vs Anti-α-synuclein
accumulation, carbidopa mutation as patterns defined dopamine gut-first hypothesis antibody efficacy
and spreading intrajejunal a risk factor differentiate neuron subtypes trial results
of α-synuclein gel for motor of Parkinson's parkinsonisms
protein fluctuations disease
MRgRUS
thalamic
ablation
for tremor
Figure: Major advances in Parkinson’s disease in the past 20 years
Schematic shows the pathophysiological, diagnostic, and therapeutic advances in Parkinson’s disease in the past 20 years. We show the year of regulatory approval for deep brain stimulation,
levodopa plus carbidopa intrajejunal, and MRgFUS. AAV-GAD=adeno-associated virus-delivered glutamic acid decarboxylase gene. GWAS=genome-wide association study. GPi=globus pallidus pars
interna. MR-gFUS=Magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound. RT-QuiC=real-time quaking-induced conversion. STN=subthalamic nucleus.
heart, and skin). The concept caught on rapidly, because and a central (brain first) origin. Notably, this concept
it coincided with clinical recognition of some non- is still based on the principle of Lewy body pathology as
motor symptoms (ie, constipation, sleep disorders, and the key factor leading to neurodegeneration, which is
hyposmia), and the Braak staging model was accepted controversial.14
intuitively as the basis for such manifestations. A study of individuals aged 60 years or younger with
Subsequently, Lewy body pathology was found in recently diagnosed

Chunk 5:
till based on the principle of Lewy body pathology as
motor symptoms (ie, constipation, sleep disorders, and the key factor leading to neurodegeneration, which is
hyposmia), and the Braak staging model was accepted controversial.14
intuitively as the basis for such manifestations. A study of individuals aged 60 years or younger with
Subsequently, Lewy body pathology was found in recently diagnosed Parkinson’s disease presented a
exogenous cells in the striatum of patients several clinical picture dominated by focal cardinal motor
years after transplantation of fetal cells, suggesting features, few and mild non-motor manifestations, and
that they were “attacked or infected” from the relatively focal dopaminergic loss in the putamen.15
surrounding tissue.11 This finding in turn led to the prion Disease progression in these patients is mainly
hypothesis for Parkinson’s disease (ie, the spreading of determined by nigrostriatal degeneration. Accordingly,
toxic synuclein as the primary mechanism of disease early loss of dopaminergic putamen innervation appears
progression). However, Lewy body pathology and to be a fundamental feature in younger patients (ie, aged
inclusions are dissociated from neuronal loss in the <60 years) and probably the primary site for pathological
substantia nigra pars compacta,12 the Braak model only events.14,16 Several dopaminergic neurons can be
fits approximately 50% of patients with Parkinson’s distinguished in rodents and humans according to their
disease, and misfolded synuclein (plus several other specific gene expression profile (ie, SOX6 and ALDH1A1)16
proteins) propagate from the periphery (eg, the gut) that have increased vulnerability and a specific pattern of
to the brain but also from the brain (striatum) to the connectivity.17
gut.13 The notion of two subtypes of onset has been Histological and neuroimaging studies also support
put forward, suggesting both a peripheral (gut first) the involvement of neuroinflammation. In the past


Chunk 6:
DH1A1)16
proteins) propagate from the periphery (eg, the gut) that have increased vulnerability and a specific pattern of
to the brain but also from the brain (striatum) to the connectivity.17
gut.13 The notion of two subtypes of onset has been Histological and neuroimaging studies also support
put forward, suggesting both a peripheral (gut first) the involvement of neuroinflammation. In the past
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 21 December 2022 1077
)P(₀₁gol–
Positive
Threshold
Negative
Cycles
ecnecseroulF
Lewy body-like
pathology in
long-term
embryonic nigral
transplants in
Parkinson's
disease

---PAGE BREAK---

Anniversary Round-up
two decades, several studies of peripheral blood and stereotactic approaches. The incisionless and relatively
CSF have shown alterations in inflammation markers quick and well tolerated nature of the procedure might
and immune cells that could initiate and perpetuate the help in the early treatment of some individuals. Low-
neurodegenerative process.18 Inflammation is an area intensity focused ultrasound is a new approach to
of expanding interest with implications for therapeutic achieve focal blood–brain barrier opening as the first
development. step towards therapeutic delivery of neurorestorative
Systems to facilitate continuous levodopa delivery therapies; however, trials are still in development. Finally,
See Online for appendix (appendix pp 1–3) are now under evaluation in clinical in animal models, the administration of neurotrophins
trials and we expect them to be marketed soon. They can exert vast dopaminergic restorative action. GDNF
would facilitate early treatment while optimising anti- has been delivered intraventricularly and directly into the
parkinsonian effects and reducing the risk of motor putamen of patients without significant clinical results,
complications. Several new drugs have become available but with net improvement in dopaminergic striatal
(appendix pp 1–3) in the past two decades but none activity (as deter

Chunk 7:
would facilitate early treatment while optimising anti- has been delivered intraventricularly and directly into the
parkinsonian effects and reducing the risk of motor putamen of patients without significant clinical results,
complications. Several new drugs have become available but with net improvement in dopaminergic striatal
(appendix pp 1–3) in the past two decades but none activity (as determined by ¹⁸F-dihydroxyphenylalanine-
has really made a substantial change in management. PET).23 Local delivery of gene vectors for enzymatic
The major unmet need is the paucity of therapies that delivery in the striatum and subthalamic nucleus have
have an effect on disease progression. Notably, the been tested but not fully developed.24
interplay between ageing and neurodegeneration is an The field is heading towards early diagnosis and
unresolved problem that requires increased attention. intervention to halt disease progression in individuals
The ideal population to test a disease-modifying with Parkinson’s disease. In the foreseeable future,
therapy must be well characterised (eg, mutation further advances in defining disease subtypes by use
carriers) and also relatively young (ie, age ≤60 years) of genetics and other biomarkers will probably lead
individuals with early Parkinson’s disease, restricted to specific therapies. The availability of neuroimaging
clinical manifestations, and focal, nigrostriatal biomarkers will allow earlier and accurate diagnosis,
dopaminergic loss.15 Some of the most relevant and hopefully will resolve the dilemma about the role
approaches tested to date are as follows. First, of Lewy body pathology as a cause or a consequence
exercise and a healthy diet are the most efficacious of neurodegeneration. The development of highly
interventions. Both retrospective studies and clinical efficacious therapy to stop neurodegeneration will be
trials have shown positive effects of aerobic exercise less easy to achieve but will inevitably occur before


Chunk 8:
o date are as follows. First, of Lewy body pathology as a cause or a consequence
exercise and a healthy diet are the most efficacious of neurodegeneration. The development of highly
interventions. Both retrospective studies and clinical efficacious therapy to stop neurodegeneration will be
trials have shown positive effects of aerobic exercise less easy to achieve but will inevitably occur before
in people with Parkinson’s disease, with benefits for The Lancet Neurology celebrates its golden jubilee. In the
both motor and non-motor manifestations.19 Whether near term, we believe that, by focusing on genetic forms
these results are driven by parallel compensation and on individuals with younger age of onset (ie, age
or by slowing neurodegeneration is unknown, but <60 years), future research will tackle neurodegeneration
neuroimaging evidence mainly points to increased brain in the nigrostriatal system bilaterally and improve
plasticity and enhanced dopamine release.20 Second, quality of life for many years. Admittedly, this aim might
despite initial positive findings after transplantation not be considered as the ultimate therapeutic goal but is
of striatal fetal dopaminergic cells, enthusiasm for a commendable one if achieved soon.
this intervention decreased substantially when a JAO has received consulting honoraria from Insighect and Biogen, lecture
placebo-controlled randomised study did not show honoraria from BIAL and AbbVie, and travel funds from BIAL. MHGM has
received lecture honoraria from Teva and AbbVie and travel grants from AbbVie.
significant improvement,21 and Lewy body pathology MM has received research funding from the Michael J Fox Foundation and
was detected in grafted cells. The optimisation of grafts lecture honoraria from Zambon and Palex. The figure was created with
BioRender.com.
and the timing of implantation are interesting areas in
*Jose A Obeso, Mariana H G Monje, Michele Matarazzo
development.22 Third, early application of DBS has been
j

Chunk 9:
d Lewy body pathology MM has received research funding from the Michael J Fox Foundation and
was detected in grafted cells. The optimisation of grafts lecture honoraria from Zambon and Palex. The figure was created with
BioRender.com.
and the timing of implantation are interesting areas in
*Jose A Obeso, Mariana H G Monje, Michele Matarazzo
development.22 Third, early application of DBS has been
jobeso.hmcinac@hmhospitales.com
studied under the hypothesis that earlier restoration of
Centro Integral de Neurociencias AC (CINAC), Hospital Universitario HM Puerta
brain activity should lead to slower disease progression, del Sur, Fundación de Investigación HM Hospitales, 28938 Mostoles, Madrid,
but surgical intervention continues to be considered Spain (JAO, MM); Universidad San Pablo-CEU, Madrid, Spain (JAO); CIBERNED,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain (JAO, MM); Ken and Ruth Davee
only in individuals with advanced stages of disease. Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Focused ultrasound has been used to recreate functional Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA (MHGM)
1078 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 21 December 2022

---PAGE BREAK---

Anniversary Round-up
1 Hely MA, Reid WGJ, Adena MA, Halliday GM, Morris JGL. The Sydney 14 Blesa J, Foffani G, Dehay B, Bezard E, Obeso JA. Motor and non-motor
multicenter study of Parkinson’s disease: the inevitability of dementia at circuit disturbances in early Parkinson disease: which happens first?
20 years. Mov Disord 2008; 23: 837–44. Nat Rev Neurosci 2022; 23: 115–28.
2 Halliday GM, Leverenz JB, Schneider JS, Adler CH. The neurobiological basis 15 Monje MHG, Sánchez-Ferro Á, Pineda-Pardo JA, Vela-Desojo L,
of cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2014; Alonso-Frech F, Obeso JA. Motor onset topography and progression in
29: 634–50. Parkinson’s disease: the upper limb is first. Mov Disord 2021; 36: 905–15.
3 Nalls MA, Blauwendraat C, Vallerga CL, et al. Identification of novel r

Chunk 10:
der JS, Adler CH. The neurobiological basis 15 Monje MHG, Sánchez-Ferro Á, Pineda-Pardo JA, Vela-Desojo L,
of cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2014; Alonso-Frech F, Obeso JA. Motor onset topography and progression in
29: 634–50. Parkinson’s disease: the upper limb is first. Mov Disord 2021; 36: 905–15.
3 Nalls MA, Blauwendraat C, Vallerga CL, et al. Identification of novel risk loci, 16 Poulin JF, Gaertner Z, Moreno-Ramos OA, Awatramani R. Classification of
causal insights, and heritable risk for Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis of midbrain dopamine neurons using single-cell gene expression profiling
genome-wide association studies. Lancet Neurol 2019; 18: 1091–102. approaches. Trends Neurosci 2020; 43: 155–69.
4 Hacker CD, Perlmutter JS, Criswell SR, Ances BM, Snyder AZ. Resting state 17 Evans RC. Dendritic involvement in inhibition and disinhibition of
functional connectivity of the striatum in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2012; vulnerable dopaminergic neurons in healthy and pathological conditions.
135: 3699–711. Neurobiol Dis 2022; 172: 105815.
5 Wile DJ, Agarwal PA, Schulzer M, et al. Serotonin and dopamine transporter 18 Tansey MG, Wallings RL, Houser MC, Herrick MK, Keating CE, Joers V.
PET changes in the premotor phase of LRRK2 parkinsonism: cross-sectional Inflammation and immune dysfunction in Parkinson disease.
studies. Lancet Neurol 2017; 16: 351–59. Nat Rev Immunol 2022; published online March 4. https://doi.org/
6 Nandhagopal R, Kuramoto L, Schulzer M, et al. Longitudinal progression of 10.1038/s41577-022-00684-6.
sporadic Parkinson’s disease: a multi-tracer positron emission tomography 19 Fang X, Han D, Cheng Q, et al. Association of levels of physical activity
study. Brain 2009; 132: 2970–79. with risk of Parkinson disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
7 Pineda-Pardo JA, Sánchez-Ferro Á, Monje MHG, Pavese N, Obeso JA. JAMA Netw Open 2018; 1: e182421.
Onset pattern of nigrostriatal denervation in early Parkinson’s di

Chunk 11:
disease: a multi-tracer positron emission tomography 19 Fang X, Han D, Cheng Q, et al. Association of levels of physical activity
study. Brain 2009; 132: 2970–79. with risk of Parkinson disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
7 Pineda-Pardo JA, Sánchez-Ferro Á, Monje MHG, Pavese N, Obeso JA. JAMA Netw Open 2018; 1: e182421.
Onset pattern of nigrostriatal denervation in early Parkinson’s disease. 20 Sacheli MA, Neva JL, Lakhani B, et al. Exercise increases caudate dopamine
Brain 2022; 145: 1018–28. release and ventral striatal activation in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord
8 Tang CC, Poston KL, Eckert T, et al. Differential diagnosis of parkinsonism: 2019; 34: 1891–900.
a metabolic imaging study using pattern analysis. Lancet Neurol 2010; 21 Olanow CW, Goetz CG, Kordower JH, et al. A double-blind controlled trial of
9: 149–58. bilateral fetal nigral transplantation in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol
9 Matsuoka K, Ono M, Takado Y, et al. High-contrast imaging of α-synuclein 2003; 54: 403–14.
pathologies in living patients with multiple system atrophy. Mov Disord 22 Moriarty N, Kauhausen JA, Pavan C, et al. Understanding the influence of
2022; 37: 2159–61. target acquisition on survival, integration, and phenotypic maturation of
10 Braak H, Del Tredici K, Rüb U, de Vos RAI, Jansen Steur ENH, Braak E. dopamine neurons within stem cell-derived neural grafts in a Parkinson’s
Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. disease model. J Neurosci 2022; 42: 4995–5006.
Neurobiol Aging 2003; 24: 197–211. 23 Whone A, Luz M, Boca M, et al. Randomized trial of intermittent
11 Kordower JH, Chu Y, Hauser RA, Freeman TB, Olanow CW. Lewy body-like intraputamenal glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in Parkinson’s
pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2019; 142: 512–25.
disease. Nat Med 2008; 14: 504–06. 24 Christine CW, Richardson RM, Van Laar AD, et al. Safety of AADC gene
12 Surmeier DJ, Obeso JA, Hall

Chunk 12:
of intermittent
11 Kordower JH, Chu Y, Hauser RA, Freeman TB, Olanow CW. Lewy body-like intraputamenal glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in Parkinson’s
pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2019; 142: 512–25.
disease. Nat Med 2008; 14: 504–06. 24 Christine CW, Richardson RM, Van Laar AD, et al. Safety of AADC gene
12 Surmeier DJ, Obeso JA, Halliday GM. Selective neuronal vulnerability in therapy for moderately advanced Parkinson disease: three-year outcomes
Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2017; 18: 101–13. from the PD-1101 trial. Neurology 2022; 98: e40–50.
13 Arotcarena ML, Dovero S, Prigent A, et al. Bidirectional gut-to-brain and
brain-to-gut propagation of synucleinopathy in non-human primates.
Brain 2020; 143: 1462–75.
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 21 December 2022 1079

---PAGE BREAK---



