Chunk 1:
Features of the Dopaminergic
Neurotoxin MPTP
IRWIN J. KOPIN
Natimul Institutes of Health
National Institute of Neumhgiml D i r k a nd Stmke
Buihiiy 10, Rwm 5N214
Bethesh, Maryland 20892
After the discovery that intravenous administration of l-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,5,6-
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) produces parkinsonism in humans and other primates,
possible mechanisms of its toxicity received considerable attention.a.38 The toxin was
found to destroy specific neurons in brains of several animal species as well as in brains
of primates. Vulnerability to the toxin, however, was found to vary among species (and
even among strains within species), with age and with sex. In monkeys, nigrostriatal
dopaminergic neurons are selectively vulnerable to the toxin, whereas in mice, which
require higher doses of the toxin, the effects are less specific and involve noradrenergic,
as well as other dopaminewc neurons. Rats are even more resistant to the toxin, al-
though some effects have been reported. Although there has been enormous progress
in understanding the processes involved in MPTP toxicity, a number of features remain
unexplained. It is the purpose of this brief review to outline what has been learned
about mechanisms involved in MPTP toxicity and to focus on several unresolved issues.
BIOACTIVATION OF MPTP IN BRAIN BY
MAO-B IN ASTROCYTES
Metabolic conversion of MPTP to a toxic metabolite, 1-methylPphenylpyridinium
(MPP+), is mediated by monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B). In brain, MAO-B is con-
tained mostly in astrocytes, and MPP+ is believed to be formed mainly in these cells.
If formation of MPP+ is blocked by inhibition of MAO-B, MPTP is not toxic. Since
systemically administered MPP+ (or MPP+ formed in peripheral tissues) does not pass
the blood-brain barrier, entry of MMT is clearly important for its pharmacologic and
toxic effects in brain.
Differences among species in MAO-B localization in brain have been cited as a basis
for differing vulnerabilities to MPTP toxicity.19,31

Chunk 2:
on of MPP+ is blocked by inhibition of MAO-B, MPTP is not toxic. Since
systemically administered MPP+ (or MPP+ formed in peripheral tissues) does not pass
the blood-brain barrier, entry of MMT is clearly important for its pharmacologic and
toxic effects in brain.
Differences among species in MAO-B localization in brain have been cited as a basis
for differing vulnerabilities to MPTP toxicity.19,31.41 In primates, the highest levels of
immunoreactive MAO-B is associated with astrocytes in the substantia nigra and basal
ganglia, whereas in the rat, MAO-B is found mainly in the cells lining the ventricles
and blood vessels.41 The greater vulnerability of primate nigrostriatal neurons to
MPTP toxicity may be related to the higher levels of MAO-B found in the nigrostriatal
pathway. On the other hand, the high levels of MAO-B in the microvessels of rat brain
have been proposed as a biochemical barrier to protect the brain of this species from
circulating MlTP. Rapid conversion of lipid-soluble MPTP to MPP+, which does
96

---PAGE BREAK---

KOPIN: FEATURES OF MPTP 97
not readily penetrate lipid membranes, would prevent penetration of the toxin into
the brain. However, Riachi et ~ 1fou.nd ~that~ [3H ]MPTP, like [14C]butanol, was ex-
tracted almost completely during a single passage of blood through the rat brain, with
radioactivity distributed almost uniformly in the various areas examined. These results
show that conversion of MPTP to MPP' is not sufficiently rapid to block its entry
into rat brain. Afier entering the brain, the levels of tritium from [3H]MPTP declined
much more slowly than those of [%]butanol, which was rapidly washed out of the
brain. Also the relatively slow decline in brain tritium could not be attributed to
formation of MPP' since tritium retention was unaltered by inhibition of MAO-B.
Thus, it must be concluded that MPTP not only rapidly enters, but is by some means
retained in the brain without being metabolized by MAO-B. Riachi etaI.32 attributed
r

Chunk 3:
lowly than those of [%]butanol, which was rapidly washed out of the
brain. Also the relatively slow decline in brain tritium could not be attributed to
formation of MPP' since tritium retention was unaltered by inhibition of MAO-B.
Thus, it must be concluded that MPTP not only rapidly enters, but is by some means
retained in the brain without being metabolized by MAO-B. Riachi etaI.32 attributed
retention of MPTP to its higher octanol/water partition coefficient (15.6 vs. 7.0 for
butanol), but it is unlikely that this two-fold difference accounts for the greater than
15-fold difference in washout rate constants for MPTP and butanol (0.09 min-1 and
1.37 min-1, respectively).
An alternative explanation for MPTP retention might be related to its amine moiety,
which at physiological pH is almost totally protonated. Binding of cationic MPTP to
acidic intracellular sites could contribute to its retention and conversion to MPP' in
astrocytes. Recent studies (Marini, Schwartz and Kopin, unpublished observations) on
the uptake and disposition of MPTP in cultured astrocytes support this possibility.
[3H]MPTP accumulates rapidly from the incubation medium into cultured rat cere-
bellar astrocytes, reaching concentrations much greater than those in the medium. Pre-
incubation with pargyline has no significant effect on the astrocytic accumulation of
tritium, indicating that, like retention of tritium from [3H]MPTP in brain, metab-
olism to MPP' is not necessary for accumulation of the radioactivity.
In piha, concentration by cells or organelles of amines from surrounding medium
results, at least in part, from differences in hydrogen ion concentration. Methylamine
is a weak nonbinding amine which has been used to estimate differences in pH be-
tween medium and chromaf?in granules, lysosomes, chloroplasts, bacteria, etc. 1' It is
assumed that only the unprotonated form of methylamine diffuses across the lipid
membrane, that the concentration of the unprotonated amine in the lipid

Chunk 4:
, at least in part, from differences in hydrogen ion concentration. Methylamine
is a weak nonbinding amine which has been used to estimate differences in pH be-
tween medium and chromaf?in granules, lysosomes, chloroplasts, bacteria, etc. 1' It is
assumed that only the unprotonated form of methylamine diffuses across the lipid
membrane, that the concentration of the unprotonated amine in the lipid mernbrane-
bounded compartment is identical to that in the medium, and that there is no sig-
nificant binding of this simple amine. Since at physiological pH almost all methylamine
is protonated, total amine concentrations closely approximate the concentrations of
the amine cations. From the Henderson-Hasselbach equation it follows that the log
C,,/C,,, is equal to the difference between the pH in the medium and that in the
organelles. When intact cells are used, if there are intracellular organelles, only an
apparent difference in pH, based on the net H' concentration in the cell, can be
obtained. The ratio, Cin/C&, can, however, provide a valid estimate of amine accu-
mulation based on differences in pH between the medium and various intracellular
compartments. If cellular accumulation of an amine exceeds that of methylamine, the
amine must be bound to a cellular component.
In cultured astrocytes, at physiological pH, accumulation of MlTP is about 15-fold
greater than that of methylamine. MPTP is concentrated about 50-fold over the con-
centration in the medium, whereas methylamine is concentrated only 2.7-fold. This
indicates that MPTP is bound to some astrocytic structure(s).
Many physiologically and pharmacologically active substances contain a hydro-
phobic ring structure and side chain with an amine group which, at physiological pH,
is protonated. Because of their hydrophilic and lipophilic moieties, such cationic

---PAGE BREAK---

98 ANNALS NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
amphophilic compounds have complex interactions with phospholipids and phospho-
lipid-containing

Chunk 5:
Many physiologically and pharmacologically active substances contain a hydro-
phobic ring structure and side chain with an amine group which, at physiological pH,
is protonated. Because of their hydrophilic and lipophilic moieties, such cationic

---PAGE BREAK---

98 ANNALS NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
amphophilic compounds have complex interactions with phospholipids and phospho-
lipid-containing membranes; they accumulate selectively in tissues, such as lung, brain
and liver, which contain high levels of phospholipids22 Since these cationic ampho-
lytes are bound mainly in lysosomes they are called “lysosomotropic.” MlTP may be
considered to be included in this class of compounds.
MPTP accumulation in cultured astrocytes is pH-dependent, and chloroquine and
ammonium ions, which are highly lysosomotropic, diminish MPTP accumulation
(Marini, Schwartz and Kopin, unpublished observations). Furthermore, disruption of
pH gradients by monensin, a carboxylic ionophore that acts as an antiporter for so-
dium-hydrogen exchange,Z7 decreases MPTP uptake by cultured astrocytes. Thus
intra-astrocytic anionic binding sites, probably mostly lysosomes, appear to be impor-
tant in the capture and retention of protonated MPTP in brain. Reversibly bound
MPTP can provide a reservoir of accumulated MPTP which is sequestered until me-
tabolized by MAO-B to l-methyl4phenyl-2,d-dihydropyridinium (MPDP+) and
then to MPP’.
This hypothesis explains two observations in intact animals. The first is the demon-
stration by Bankiewicz et al. I that unilateral intracarotid administration of MPTP to
monkeys causes a contralateral hemiparkinsonian syndrome. On the side administered
MlTP, dopamine levels in the basal ganglia are markedly depleted and dopamineqpc
neurons in the substantia n i p a re almost totally obliterated. These unilateral effects
are consistent with efficient extraction of MPTP from blood into brain during the first
passage and rapid clearance of MPTP from the circulation. Prompt

Chunk 6:
s causes a contralateral hemiparkinsonian syndrome. On the side administered
MlTP, dopamine levels in the basal ganglia are markedly depleted and dopamineqpc
neurons in the substantia n i p a re almost totally obliterated. These unilateral effects
are consistent with efficient extraction of MPTP from blood into brain during the first
passage and rapid clearance of MPTP from the circulation. Prompt removal of MPTP
from blood protects the opposite side from exposure to the toxin, whereas its retention
in the exposed hemisphere allows formation of the toxic metabolite, MPP+. Second
is the report by Herkenham et al. 12 that MPTP-lesioned substantia nigra accumulates
more [14C]MPP+t han intact substantia nip. At 1,3, or 10 days after administration
of [14C]MPTPt o hemiparkinsonian monkeys (one year after they had received a toxic
dose of MPTP into one carotid artery), striatal levels of [W]MPP+ were markedly
lower on the MPTP-lesioned side. This is consistent with accumulation of MPP+ in
the dopaminergic nerve terminals. The reverse was found in the substantia nigra; levels
of MPP+ were hkhm on the MPTP-treated side, where there was neuronal destruc-
tion and gliosis. Presumably the increased &a in the damaged substantia n i p cap-
tured the MPTP more efficiently and within one day converted it to MPP+, which
was then slowly cleared.
UPTAKE OF MPP+ BY MONOAMINERGIC NEURONS
Specificity of MPTP toxicity for catecholaminergic neurons is conferred by the spe-
cial properties of its metabolite, MPP+, which is a substrate for the amine uptake sys-
tems in these neurons.16 Since MPTP appears to be oxidized by MAO-B mainly in
astrocytes, uptake by catecholaminergic neurons requires that the compound reach the
extracellular fluid. Relatively slow appearance of MPP+ in the cultured astrocytes and
surrounding medium35 (Marini, Schwartz and Kopin, unpublished observations) is
consistent with the view that the bound, sequestered stores of MPTP provide a reser-
voir for cytoplasmic MP

Chunk 7:
ppears to be oxidized by MAO-B mainly in
astrocytes, uptake by catecholaminergic neurons requires that the compound reach the
extracellular fluid. Relatively slow appearance of MPP+ in the cultured astrocytes and
surrounding medium35 (Marini, Schwartz and Kopin, unpublished observations) is
consistent with the view that the bound, sequestered stores of MPTP provide a reser-
voir for cytoplasmic MPTP during its MAO-B-mediated, relatively slow, oxidation to
MPDP+ and MPP+. There are several possible means by which MPP+ appears in the
extracellular fluid bathing the astrocytes. First, MPP+ might diffuse slowly through
the astrocyte cell membrane. Molecular orbital calculations imply that the positive

---PAGE BREAK---

KOPIN: FEATURES OF MM'P 99
charge of MPP+ is highly delocalized throughout the pyridinium ring, making the
compound less polar and thereby permitting slow diffision through lipid mem-
brane~.P~er~sis tence of high intracellular levels of MPP', however, suggests that
MPP+ does not equilibrate readily across the lipid membrane of cultured a~trocytes~~
(Marini, Schwartz and bpin, unpublished observations). Poor cell membrane pene-
tration by MPP+ and its very slow intracellular accumulation can also be inferred
from the report by Di Monte et d7th at MPP+ is toxic to hepatocytes in culture only
after a long lag period.
Another possibility is that MPP+ is formed extracellularly from MPDP+, which
diffuses out of the astrocytes. Unlike MPP+, MPDP+ can isomerize to an uncharged
free base that can readily diffise through the lipid cell membrane. When added directly
to the medium, MPDP is more toxic to isolated hepatocytes than MPP+,B suggesting
that MPDP+ enters the cells more rapidly than MPP'. During MAO-B-catalyzed oxi-
dation of MPTP in vim, MPDP+ formation is more rapid than its oxidation to
MPP+38;u ntil MPDP+ formation is limited by depletion of MPTP, its concentration
is higher than that of MPP'. Because of its rapid formation from MPTP and lipid-
soluble

Chunk 8:
e medium, MPDP is more toxic to isolated hepatocytes than MPP+,B suggesting
that MPDP+ enters the cells more rapidly than MPP'. During MAO-B-catalyzed oxi-
dation of MPTP in vim, MPDP+ formation is more rapid than its oxidation to
MPP+38;u ntil MPDP+ formation is limited by depletion of MPTP, its concentration
is higher than that of MPP'. Because of its rapid formation from MPTP and lipid-
soluble properties, MPDP+ might be expected to diffise from the cytoplasm into the
medium more rapidly than it is oxidized to MPP'. Nonenzymatic conversion of
MPDP' to MPP+ (and MlTP) by disproportionation occurs at physiological pH5
and spontaneous autoxidation of MPDP+ to MPP+ at pH 8.0 has been reported by
Koytowski et aLZ3A fter addition of MPDP+ to the culture medium, intracellular ac-
cumulation of MPP+ in hepatocytes is unaffected by pretreatment with the MA0
inhibitor, pargyline.8 These results suggest that MPDP' readily diffuses into hepato-
cytes and that intracellular disproportionation (and perhaps spontaneous autoxida-
tion) may be important in generating MPP+ from MPDP+. Similarly, slow diffision
of MPP+ and more rapid diffision of MPDP+ with nonenzymatic conversion to
MPP+ may account for the appearance of the toxic metabolite in the fluid sumund-
ing astrocytes.
VULNERABILITY TO MPP+ TOXICITY
Uptake of MPP+ by dopaminergic neurons via the catecholamine uptake system
appears to account, at least in part, for the specificity of the toxic effects of MPTP.16
Drugs such as mazindol, nomifensin, and amfolenic acid, which inhibit dopamine u p
take, prevent MPTP toxicity in brains of mice, but it has been more di5cult to dem-
onstrate their efficacy in primates. Schultz et ~1.~sh'o wed that nomifensin effectively
blocked MPTP neurotoxicity in primates only when administered both before, and
for weeks after, the toxin, consistent with the long persistence of MPP+ in the brain
of monkeys treated with MPTP.18 Uptake of MPP+ does not, however, explain
specific targeting of nig

Chunk 9:
 of mice, but it has been more di5cult to dem-
onstrate their efficacy in primates. Schultz et ~1.~sh'o wed that nomifensin effectively
blocked MPTP neurotoxicity in primates only when administered both before, and
for weeks after, the toxin, consistent with the long persistence of MPP+ in the brain
of monkeys treated with MPTP.18 Uptake of MPP+ does not, however, explain
specific targeting of nigrostriatal dopamineqyc neurons in primates. Herkenham et
al. I2 showed that MPP+ accumulates in many catecholaminergic neurons in monkey
brain, but does not appear to permanently damage them. Thus MPP+ toxicity ap-
pears to be related to the vulnerability of the cell rather than to accessibility of the toxin
to its target.
Vulnerability of primate nigrostriatal neurons has been associated with their neuro-
melanin content. D'Amato et aL6 reported that MPP+ binds to neuromelanin and
suggested that intraneuronal sequestration of the toxin provided a source for mainte-
nance of cytoplasmic MPP+ at a level that is toxic to other organelles in the neuron.

---PAGE BREAK---

100 ANNALS NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
However, Herkenham et al. 12 found high MPP+ levels in locus coeruleus and other
monoaminergic neurons which survive its neurotoxicity. Furthermore, MPTP is toxic
to sheep nigrostriatal neurons, which do not have high neurornelanin content.10 In-
tracellular sequestration of MPP+ similar to neuromelanin binding has been reported
in adrenal medullary chromaffin granules, but in this case, resistance to MPP+ tox-
icity was attributed to the sequestration.33 Thus, vulnerability to MPP+ toxicity may
be related to properties of the target cell rather than to factors affecting distribution
or storage of the toxin.
CELLULAR NEUROXICXTY OF MPP+
After entry into the cytoplasm, MPP+ is taken up into mitochondria as a result of
an energy-dependent electrochemical gradient.30 Mitochondrial accumulation of
MPP' attains concentrations which are sufficient to inhibit NADH dehydrogenas

Chunk 10:
 MPP+ toxicity may
be related to properties of the target cell rather than to factors affecting distribution
or storage of the toxin.
CELLULAR NEUROXICXTY OF MPP+
After entry into the cytoplasm, MPP+ is taken up into mitochondria as a result of
an energy-dependent electrochemical gradient.30 Mitochondrial accumulation of
MPP' attains concentrations which are sufficient to inhibit NADH dehydrogenase
(Complex I) and thereby block mitochondrial respirati~n.T~h~e,r~e ~ar e several im-
portant consequences of such disruption of mitochondrial energy metabolism.
Disturbance of Cytosou a2N+u meow
Cytosol concentrations of free Ca2+ are maintained at a level of about 100 pM,
which is four orders of magnitude lower than that of extracellular Ca2+. Also Ca2+ is
sequestered in endoplasmic reticulum and in mitochondria. Expenditure of energy is
required to maintain normal cytosolic CaZt concentrations. When concentrations of
Ca*+ become elevated, cells die. Although not all of the mechanisms responsible for
Cazt-mediated cell death are known, it is clear that elevation of cytosolic Ca2+ has
been implicated in the toxicity of a wide range of toxin^.^,^
Enhancement o f EnrlogenorrJ pbm&l ExcitoaMcins
ATP is also required to maintain cell membrane ionic gradients; lack of this energy
source may result in a partial depolarization which could enhance vulnerability to ex-
citotoxins. Although this may also influence cytosolic Ca2+,o ther mechanisms may
play a role. When intracellular energy levels are reduced, glutamate becomes neuro-
toxic, presumably as a result of relief of Mg2+ block of the N-methyl-waspartate re-
ceptors.26T urski et a1.W demonstrated that selective antagonists (CPP or MK-801) of
the NMDA subtype ofthe L-glutamate receptor, administered into the substantia n i p
or systemically in repeated doses, protect against neurotoxicity of intranigral MPP.+
Preferential antagonists (CNQX and NBQX) of the quisqualate subtypes of the ~-glu-
tamate receptor hiled to prevent MP

Chunk 11:
he N-methyl-waspartate re-
ceptors.26T urski et a1.W demonstrated that selective antagonists (CPP or MK-801) of
the NMDA subtype ofthe L-glutamate receptor, administered into the substantia n i p
or systemically in repeated doses, protect against neurotoxicity of intranigral MPP.+
Preferential antagonists (CNQX and NBQX) of the quisqualate subtypes of the ~-glu-
tamate receptor hiled to prevent MPP+ toxicity. Impairment of intracellular energy
metabolism and potentiation of endogenous excitotoxins has been hypothesized also
by Beal et a1.2 to explain their observations that NMDA antagonists (MK 801 or local
injection of kynurenine) prevent excitotoxic lesions produced by nigrostriatal injection
of amino-oxyacetic acid. The authors suggest that AOAA blocks the pyridoxal-depen-
dent mitochondrial malate-aspartate shunt and thereby disturbs energy production,
indirectly producing excitotoxicity.

---PAGE BREAK---

KOPIN: FEATURES OF MPrP 101
Although MPP+ redox cycling with generation of free radicals and been initially
considered a possible mechanism of MPTP toxicity, one-electron reduction of MPP+
to MPP- is beyond the capacity of physiological reductants.” There is, however, evi-
dence that free radical generation does play a role in MPTP toxicity, at least in mice.
In some studies, antioxidants have conferred some protection against MPTP tox-
icity. 34 Recently, transgenic mice with increased superoxide dismutase have been
found resistant to MPTP toxicity.28 In another study, administration of desfeniox-
amine, which chelates iron and is known to diminish iron-dependent free radical
damage, prevented MPTP destruction of neurons in the substantia n i pa nd other re-
gions of mouse brain.I3 The mechanism of free radical generation may be related to
inhibition of mitochondrial respiration. Recently, Hasagawa etal.1 1 found that MPP+
inhibition of bovine heart mitochondrial particle respiration generates superoxide ions
(determined by the oxidation of adrenaline to adr

Chunk 12:
ee radical
damage, prevented MPTP destruction of neurons in the substantia n i pa nd other re-
gions of mouse brain.I3 The mechanism of free radical generation may be related to
inhibition of mitochondrial respiration. Recently, Hasagawa etal.1 1 found that MPP+
inhibition of bovine heart mitochondrial particle respiration generates superoxide ions
(determined by the oxidation of adrenaline to adrenochrome) and enhanced NADH-
supported lipid membrane oxidation. In endothelid cells, free radical formation in-
duced by exposure to hypoxanthine and xanthine oxidase produced a sustained rise
in cytosolic Ca2+.9T his effect was dependent upon extracellular Caz+.T he authors
suggested that lipid peroxidation and cross-linking of proteins may produce cation
ionophores and transient hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane.
Dktwrbam ofA#MIIcl lhnspmc
Anterograde and retrograde fast axonal transport are dependent upon ATP.24.36
Shortly after administration of toxic doses of MI”, the axons of the nigrostriatal
neurons dorsal to the SNc become swollen and intensely fluorescent with dopa-
mine. 15.20 These swollen regions of the axon contain MPP+ accumulations. l2 Presum-
ably both antero- and retrograde transport are impeded. After this effect of a toxic dose
of MPTP, dopaminergic terminals appear to die or retract, after which there is a slower
degeneration of the rest of the neuron. The recent discovery that brain-derived neuro-
trophic factor (BDNF) may support dopaminergic neuron development and diminish
MPP+ toxicity in cultured dopaminergic neuror1s14.2~r aises the possibility that neu-
ronal death is a consequence of failure of retrograde axonal transport of an essential
neurotrophic factor.
CONCLUSIONS
After rapid entry into the brain, retention ofMPTP appears to involve sequestration
in astrocyte acidic organelles. This reservoir maintains cystolic MPrP concentrations
during its metabolism by MAO-B to MPDP+ and MPP+. Relatively rapid difhsion
of MPDP+ from the cytosol

Chunk 13:
hat neu-
ronal death is a consequence of failure of retrograde axonal transport of an essential
neurotrophic factor.
CONCLUSIONS
After rapid entry into the brain, retention ofMPTP appears to involve sequestration
in astrocyte acidic organelles. This reservoir maintains cystolic MPrP concentrations
during its metabolism by MAO-B to MPDP+ and MPP+. Relatively rapid difhsion
of MPDP+ from the cytosol into extracellular fluids with subsequent nonenzymatic
oxidation to MPP+ and/or slower clearance of MPP+ through the astrocyte plasma
membrane makes the toxin available for uptake by monoaminewc neurons. After entry
into the cytoplasm, MPP+ is hrther concentrated in mitochondria, where it disrupts
enetgy metabolism by blocking NADH dehydrogenase (Complex I). This produces an
array of cellular dysfunctions; partial depolarization may enhance vulnerability to en-

---PAGE BREAK---

102 ANNALS NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
dogenous potential excitotoxins (e.g., glutamate) and/or facilitate entry of extracellular
Ca2+;c ytosolic CaZ+a lso may increase from mitochondria1 loss of Ca2+;f ree radical
formation increases; and axonal transport is retarded. There may well be interrelation-
ships of endogenous excitotoxins, energy depletion, free radical formation and cyto-
solic Ca2+, each of which could account for cell damage, which proceeds to cell
death, and blocking axonal transport may deprive the neuron of essential neurotrophic
factors from target tissues. The peculiar vulnerability of dopaminevc nigrostriatal
neurons to the toxic effects of MPP+ remains unexplained. Most of the mechanisms
of MPTP cellular toxicity have been described in tissues other than nigrostriatal dopa-
minergic neurons and in species other than primates. It is likely that several of these
contribute to MMT toxicity, but their relative importance may well vary with the cellu-
lar properties of the target tissue. Thus the mechanisms responsible for the death of
catecholaminergic neurons in brains of mice 

Chunk 14:
nisms
of MPTP cellular toxicity have been described in tissues other than nigrostriatal dopa-
minergic neurons and in species other than primates. It is likely that several of these
contribute to MMT toxicity, but their relative importance may well vary with the cellu-
lar properties of the target tissue. Thus the mechanisms responsible for the death of
catecholaminergic neurons in brains of mice resulting from repeated high doses of
MPTP may be different from those responsible for the destruction of dopaminergic
nipstnatal neurons after a single relatively low dose of the protoxin in monkeys. The
relationship of any of the factors implicated in MITP toxicity to the pathogenesis of
Parkinson’s disease is tantalizing and the subject of intense study.
REFERENCES
1. BANKIEWCZK, . S., E. H. OLDFIELCD., C . CHIUEHJ,. L. DOPPMADN., M. JACOBOWZ
& I. J. KOPIN1. 986. Hemiparkinsonism in monkeys after unilateral internal carotid
artery infusion of l-methyl-&phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). Life Sci. 39:
7-16.
2. BEAL, M. F., J. S. KENTON, T. BRADLESY. ,F . HYMANE,. S. FINN & W. KOROSHETZ.
1991. Amino-oxyacetic acid results in excitotoxin lesions by a novel indirect mechanism.
Neurology 41: 174.
3. BONDY, S. C. 1989. Intracellular calcium and neurotoxic events. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 11:
527-531.
4. BOOBIS, A. R, D. J. FAWTHRO&P D. S. DAVIES1. 990. Mechanisms of cell toxicity. Cum.
Opin. (XU Biol. 2: 231-237.
5. CASTAGN . O NL..I . , . J R ., K. CHIBA& A. J. TREVOR19. 85. Potential bioactivation pathways
for the neurotoxin ~l-methyl-&phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydmpyridine (MPTP). Lifi Sci. 36:
225-230.
6. DAMATO,J ., P. LIPMAN& S. S. SNYDE1R9.8 6.S electivity of the parkinsonian neurotoxin
MPTP: Toxic metabolite MPP+ binds to neuromelanin. Science 231: 987-989.
7. DIMONTED,. , G. EKSTROMT., S HINKAM, . T. SMITHA, . J. TREVO&R N. CASTAGNOLI,
JR. 1987. Role of 1-methyl4phenylpyridinium ion formation and accumulation in
l-methyl-&phenyI-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity to i

Chunk 15:
ifi Sci. 36:
225-230.
6. DAMATO,J ., P. LIPMAN& S. S. SNYDE1R9.8 6.S electivity of the parkinsonian neurotoxin
MPTP: Toxic metabolite MPP+ binds to neuromelanin. Science 231: 987-989.
7. DIMONTED,. , G. EKSTROMT., S HINKAM, . T. SMITHA, . J. TREVO&R N. CASTAGNOLI,
JR. 1987. Role of 1-methyl4phenylpyridinium ion formation and accumulation in
l-methyl-&phenyI-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity to isolated hepatocytes. Chem.
Biol. Interact. 62: 105-116.
8. EKSTROMG, ., D. Dr MONTEM, . S. SAND&Y M. T. SMITH1. 987. Comparative toxicity
and antioxidant activity of l-methyl-4phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridinaen d its mono-
amine oxidase B-generated metabolites in isolated hepatocytes and liver microsomes.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 255: 14-18.
9. FRANCESCHID, ., D. GRAHAMM,. SARASUA & R M. ZOLLINGEJRR, . 1990. Mechanisms
of oxygen free radical-induced calcium overload in endothelial cells. Surgery 108:
292-297.
10. HAMMOCBK. , D.,A . M. BEALE, T. WORK, S. J. GEE,R GUNTHERR, J. HIGGINS,
T. SHINK&A N. CASTAGNOJRL.I ,1 989. A sheep model for MFIT-induced Parkmson-
like symptoms. Life Sci. 45: 1601-1608.
11. HASEGAWEA.,, K. TAKESHIGTE., OISHI,Y . MURN & S. MINAKAMI1. 990. 1-Methyl-
4phenylpyridinium (MPP+) induces NADHdependent superoxide formation and en-

---PAGE BREAK---

KOPIN: FEATURES OF MPrP 103
hances NADH-dependent lipid peroxidation in bovine heart mitochondrial particles. Bio-
chem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 107: 1049-1055.
12. HERKENHAMM., ,M . D. LITTLE, K. BANKIEWICZ, S.4.Y ANG, S. P. MARKE&Y J. N. Jo-
HANNESSEN. 1991. Selective retention of MPP+ within the monoaminergic systems of
the primate brain following MPTP administration; an in t+vo autoradiographic study.
Neuroscience 40: 133-158.
13. HERREROM, . T., M. R LUQUIN,0 . BELOQUIJ, . LAGUNA& J. A. OBESO1. 991. Dcs-
ferrioxamine prevents MlTP-induced neurotoxicity in mice. Neurology 41: 175.
14. HYMANC,., M. HOFERY, .-A. BARDE, M. JUHASZ, D. YANCQPOULQS, S. P. SQUINTO&
R M. LINDSAY1.9 91. BDNF is a neurotrophic fictor

Chunk 16:
s of
the primate brain following MPTP administration; an in t+vo autoradiographic study.
Neuroscience 40: 133-158.
13. HERREROM, . T., M. R LUQUIN,0 . BELOQUIJ, . LAGUNA& J. A. OBESO1. 991. Dcs-
ferrioxamine prevents MlTP-induced neurotoxicity in mice. Neurology 41: 175.
14. HYMANC,., M. HOFERY, .-A. BARDE, M. JUHASZ, D. YANCQPOULQS, S. P. SQUINTO&
R M. LINDSAY1.9 91. BDNF is a neurotrophic fictor for dopaminergic neurons of the
substantia nip. Nature 350: 230-232.
15. JACOBOWITDZ., M., R S. BURNSC, . C. CHIUEH& I. J. KOPIN.1 984.N -methyl-4phenyl-
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) causes destruction of the nigrostriatal but not the
mesolimbic dopamine system in the monkey. Psychopharmacol. Bull. 20: 416-422.
16. JAVITCHJ,. A,, R J. D'AMATO,S . M. STRI?TMAITE&R S. S. SNYDER1. 985.P arkinsonism-
inducing neurotoxin, l-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine: Uptake of the
metabolite N-methyl4phenylpyridine by dopamine neurones explains selective toxicity.
Pm.N atl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 82: 2173-2177.
17. JOHNSON, R G.,N . J. CARLSON &A. SCARPA1. 978.A pH and catecholamine distribution
in isolated chromafh granules. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 1512-1521.
18. JOHANNESSEN, J. N., C. C. CHIUEH,R S. BURNS & S. P. MARKEY1. 985. Differences in
the metabolism of Ml" in the rodent and primate parallel differences in sensitivity to
its neurotoxic e&cts. Life Sci. 36: 219-224.
19. KUABIA,R N., M. J. MITCHELL& S. I. HABIK. 1987.C orrelation of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine neurotoxicity with blood-brain barrier monoamine oxidase ac-
tivity. Pm.N atl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 3521-3525.
20. Krrr, C. A., L. C. CORK,F . EIDELBERGT,. H. JOH & D. L. PRICE.1 986. Injury of nigral
neurons exposed to l-methyl4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine:A tyrosine hydroxy-
lase immunocytochemical study in monkey. Neuroscience 17: 1089-1103.
21. KNUSEL,B ., J. W. WINSLOW,A . ROSENTHAL,L . E. BURTON, D. P. SEID, K. NIKOLIGS
& F. H E ~19.91 . Promotion of central cholinergic and dopaminergic neuro

Chunk 17:
.
20. Krrr, C. A., L. C. CORK,F . EIDELBERGT,. H. JOH & D. L. PRICE.1 986. Injury of nigral
neurons exposed to l-methyl4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine:A tyrosine hydroxy-
lase immunocytochemical study in monkey. Neuroscience 17: 1089-1103.
21. KNUSEL,B ., J. W. WINSLOW,A . ROSENTHAL,L . E. BURTON, D. P. SEID, K. NIKOLIGS
& F. H E ~19.91 . Promotion of central cholinergic and dopaminergic neuron difkren-
tiation by brain-derived neurotrophic fictor but not neurotrophin 3. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 88: 961-964.
22. KODAVANTUI,. P . & H. M. MEHENDALE19. 90.C ationic amphiphilic drug and phospho-
lipid storage disorder. Pharmacol. Rev. 42: 327-354.
23. KOYTOWSKWI, ., C. C. FELIX& B. KALYANARAMMA1N9.8 7. Mechanism ofoxidation of 1-
methyl4phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridinium (MPDP+). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
144: 692-698.
24. LLINAS,R , M. SUGIMORIJ,. W. LIN, P. L. LEOP~LD& S. T. BRADY.1 989. ATP-
dependent directional movement of rat synaptic vesicles injected into the pmynaptic ter-
minal of squid giant synapse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86: 5656-5660.
25. NICKLASW, . J., I. VYAS& R E. HEIKKILA19.8 5. Inhibition of NADH-linked oxidation
in brain mitochondria by 1-methyl-4phenyl-pyridine, a metabolite of the neurotoxin,
l-methyl4phenyl-l,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine. Life Sci. 36: 2503-2508.
26. NOVELLIA, ., J. A. REILLY,P . G. LYSKO& R C. HENNEBERRY19.8 8. Glutamate becomes
neurotoxic via the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor when intracellular energy levels are re-
duced. Brain Res. 451: 205-212.
27. PRESSMANB, . C. 1968. Ionophorous antibiotics as models for biological transport. Fed.
Pa.2 7: 1283-1288.
28. PRZEDBORSKSI.,, V. KOSTIC& V. JACKSON-LEWI1S9.9 1. Transgenic mice with increased
activity of superoxide dismutase are resistant to MPTP-induced toxicity. Neurology 41:
175.
29. RAMSAY, R R, J. I. SALACH& T. P. SINGER1. 986. Uptake of the neurotoxin l-methyl-
Cphenylpyridine (MPP+)b y mitochondria and its relation to the inhibition of the mito-
chondrial oxidation of 

Chunk 18:
. Fed.
Pa.2 7: 1283-1288.
28. PRZEDBORSKSI.,, V. KOSTIC& V. JACKSON-LEWI1S9.9 1. Transgenic mice with increased
activity of superoxide dismutase are resistant to MPTP-induced toxicity. Neurology 41:
175.
29. RAMSAY, R R, J. I. SALACH& T. P. SINGER1. 986. Uptake of the neurotoxin l-methyl-
Cphenylpyridine (MPP+)b y mitochondria and its relation to the inhibition of the mito-
chondrial oxidation of NAD+-linked substrates by MPP+. Biochem. Biophys. Rcs.
Commun. 134: 743-738.

---PAGE BREAK---

104 ANNALS NEW YORK ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
30. RAMSAY, R R & T. P. SINGER1. 986. Energy-dependent uptake of N-methyl4phenyl-
pyridinium, the neurotoxic metabolite of l-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine,
by mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 7585-7587.
31. RIACHI, N. J., S. I. HARIKR, N. KALARIA & L. M. SAYRE1. 988. On the mechanisms
underlying l-methyl-Q-phenyI-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine neurotoxicity. 11. Suscepti-
bility among mammalian species correlates with the toxin's metabolic patterns in brain
microvessels and liver. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 244: 44348.
32. RIACHI, N. J., J. C. LAMANNA& S. I. HARIK1. 989. Entry of l-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-
tetrahydropyridine into the rat brain. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 249: 744-748.
33. REINHARD,J . F., JR., A. J. DANIELS& G. R PAINTER1. 990. Carrier-independent entry
of 1-methyl4phenylpyridinium (MPP+) into adrenal chromatfin cells as a consequence
of charge delocalization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 168: 1143-1148.
34. SAYREL, . M. 1989. Biochemical mechanism of action of the dopaminergic neurotoxin
l-methyl-4-phenyl-l,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine( MPTP). Toxicol. Lett. 4 121-149.
35. SCHINELLIS, ., A. ZUDDAS,I . J. KOPIN, J. L. BARKER& U. DI PORZIO.1 988. 1-Methyl-
4phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine metabolism and 1-methyl-Qphenylpyridinium up-
take in dissociated cell cultures from the embryonic mesencephalon. J. Neurochem. 50
1900-1907.
36. SCHNAPPB, . J. & T. S. REESE. 1989. Dynein is the motor for retrograde axonal transport


Chunk 19:
opyridine( MPTP). Toxicol. Lett. 4 121-149.
35. SCHINELLIS, ., A. ZUDDAS,I . J. KOPIN, J. L. BARKER& U. DI PORZIO.1 988. 1-Methyl-
4phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine metabolism and 1-methyl-Qphenylpyridinium up-
take in dissociated cell cultures from the embryonic mesencephalon. J. Neurochem. 50
1900-1907.
36. SCHNAPPB, . J. & T. S. REESE. 1989. Dynein is the motor for retrograde axonal transport
of organelles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86: 1548-1552.
37. SCHULTZW, ., E. SCARNATEI., SUNDSTROMT,. TSUTSUM&I G . T. JONSSON1. 986. The
catecholamine uptake blocker nomifensine protects against MPTP-induced parkinsonism
in monkeys. Exp. Brain Res. 63: 216-220.
38. SINGER,T . P. & R R RAMSAY1.9 90. Mechanism of the neurotoxicity of MPTP. An up-
date. FEBS Lett. 274: 1-8.
39. TREVORA., J., K. CHIBA,E . Y. Yu, P. S. CALDERAK, . P. CASTAGNOLNI,. CASTAGNOLI,
L. A. PETERSONJ,. I. SALACH& T. P. SINGER1. 986. Metabolism of MPTP in Pitnu: The
intermediate role of 2,3-MPDP+ and studies on its chemical and biochemical reactivity.
In MPTP: A Neurotoxin Producing a Parkmsonian Syndrome. S. P. Markey, N. Castag-
noli, Jr., A. J. Trevor & I. J. Kopin, Eds. Academic Press. Orlando, FL.
40. TURSKIL, ., K. BRESSLERK, . J. REITIG, P. A. LOSCHMAN&N H. WACHTEL1. 991. Pro-
tection of substantia nip from MPP+ neurotoxicity by N-methyl-maspartate antago-
nists. Nature 349: 414-418.
41. WILLOUGHBYJ.,, R F. COWBURN,J . A. HARDYV,. GLOVER& M. SANDLER1. 988.
1-Methyl4phenylpyridinium uptake by human and rat striatal synaptosomes. Neurosci.
Lett. 90: 100-106.

---PAGE BREAK---



