Chunk 1:
Research highlights
Navigation Motor systems
Echolocation over long distances An unexpected role for macrophages
in motor control
Bats are known to use echoloca- bats, which indicates that navi-
tion to orientate in their immedi- gation is improved when using Mammals rely on sophisticated at the effects of optogenetically
ate environment, although both echolocation and vision. movements for surviving, and stimulating MSMPs in mouse
whether they use a similar strat- This finding is perhaps surpris- the stretch reflex serves as a hindlimb muscle. They found
egy for long-distance navigation ing, as Kuhl’s pipistrelle bats fundamental mechanism for that this approach produced
(such as when flying towards have very small eyes with poor providing sensory feedback to a rapid activation of primary
their foraging grounds) remains visual acuity, yet nonetheless generate adaptive responses. sensory afferents and muscle
unknown. Here, Goldshtein et al. they use visual information Muscle stretching activates contraction. Moreover, these
show that bats can identify their to assist navigation. Overall, specialized receptors located in effects were rapidly blocked by
location after being translocated these data provide direct skeletal muscles — the muscle NMDA and AMPA-kainate recep-
several kilometres from their evidence that bats can identify spindles — that stimulate propri- tor antagonists or by preventing
roost and are able to navigate their location after transloca- oceptive sensory afferents that SNARE-mediated vesicle release,
home using echolocation alone, tion and fly home across long directly synapse onto motor which suggests that MSMPs
without relying on other senses. distances using echolocation. neurons, which drives muscle regulate the stretch reflex
The task of tracking echo- Analysis of the flight angle contraction. Since Sherrington’s circuit via glutamate release.
locating bats — many of which relative to their destination experiments in the late 19th The finding

Chunk 2:
 long directly synapse onto motor which suggests that MSMPs
without relying on other senses. distances using echolocation. neurons, which drives muscle regulate the stretch reflex
The task of tracking echo- Analysis of the flight angle contraction. Since Sherrington’s circuit via glutamate release.
locating bats — many of which relative to their destination experiments in the late 19th The findings described above
weigh less than 10 grams — over revealed that the bats perfor- century, the stretch reflex has have implications for locomo-
long distances is technologi- med a meandering flight at been considered a closed-loop tor performance, given the
cally challenging. The authors the beginning of their journey neuromuscular circuit. Here, sensory-feedback role of this
used ATLAS, a lightweight, and gradually transitioned to a Yan et al. find that, unexpect- proprioceptive circuit. Indeed,
high-resolution GPS tracking direct flight towards their tar- edly, muscle spindles contain the authors found (using tran-
system that enabled the tracking get. This steady improvement in an extra cellular component scriptomic analysis of dorsal
of Kuhl’s pipistrelle bats (Pip- navigation is consistent with the in macrophages that release root ganglion or muscle spindle
istrellus kuhlii) after they were idea that bats use acoustic infor- glutamate and regulate muscle primary afferents) that selective
translocated ~3 km away from mation to produce a cognitive function. depletion of MSMPs from mus-
their roost. To investigate the map of their surroundings. To The authors used a transcrip- cle tissue resulted in downregu-
sensory cues required for their test this hypothesis, the authors tomic approach to determine lation of several genes involved
subsequent navigation home, generated a 3D landscape recon- differential gene expression in locomotion. Compared with
bats were split into groups with struction of the study site and between muscle spindle and controls, the locomotor perfor-
v

Chunk 3:
 tissue resulted in downregu-
sensory cues required for their test this hypothesis, the authors tomic approach to determine lation of several genes involved
subsequent navigation home, generated a 3D landscape recon- differential gene expression in locomotion. Compared with
bats were split into groups with struction of the study site and between muscle spindle and controls, the locomotor perfor-
varying degrees of sensory dep- simulated echoes that each bat non-spindle muscle tissue in mance of mice with depleted or
rivation, including control (nor- would receive along its journey. mice. They found that muscle inactivated MSMP — including
mal senses); visually impaired; Their results revealed that when spindles showed an enrichment swimming and overground
visual and magnetic deprivation; bats made movement decisions, of neuronal genes (as expected) locomotion — was impaired.
and visual, magnetic and olfac- they flew closer to environ- and, surprisingly, of immune cell These mice showed lower levels
tory deprivation. All of the bats mental features with higher markers. Further investigation of coordination and accuracy of
were able to echolocate, and ‘echoic entropy’ — landmarks by immunostaining revealed the motor responses, and a reduced
their navigation performance that provide more distinguish- presence of a population of mac- ability to correct movement
was evaluated on the basis of able acoustic information that rophages inside the spindle cap- following a challenge.
several metrics, including flight might enable bats to recognize sule that not only had a unique Overall, these findings
duration, trajectory and speed. the objects and identify their molecular signature but also demonstrate that a population
It was found that 95% of the location, an essential feature for expressed genes more typically of macrophages that release
bats successfully returned map-based navigation. associated with neurons, such as glutamate — a function more
within a single night, inde

Chunk 4:
l, these findings
duration, trajectory and speed. the objects and identify their molecular signature but also demonstrate that a population
It was found that 95% of the location, an essential feature for expressed genes more typically of macrophages that release
bats successfully returned map-based navigation. associated with neurons, such as glutamate — a function more
within a single night, independ- Overall, these findings sug- those involved in glutamatergic commonly associated with
ent of their sensory status, gest that bats can navigate excitatory neurotransmission. neurons — directly regulate neural
which indicates that bats can across kilometre-scale distances The sensory afferent fibres activity and muscle contraction
navigate large distances with using echolocation to gener- of muscle spindles express by coupling muscle metabolic
echolocation alone. Notably, ate a cognitive map of their glutamate receptors. To inves- demands, sensation and action.
there was no difference in navi- environment. tigate whether muscle spindle Sian Lewis
gation performance between Michael Attwaters macrophages (MSMPs) can
Original article: Yan, Y. et al. Macrophages
the various sensory deprivation Original article: Goldshtein, A. et al. regulate neural activity and excite muscle spindles with glutamate to
treatments, although sighted Acoustic cognitive map–based navigation muscle responses by releasing bolster locomotion. Nature https://doi.org/
(control) bats could navigate in echolocating bats. Science 386, 561–567 glutamate, the authors looked 10.1038/s41586-024-08272-5 (2024)
(2024)
better than visually impaired
nature reviews neuroscience
Volume 26 | February 2025 | 63–64 | 64

---PAGE BREAK---



Chunk 5:
)
better than visually impaired
nature reviews neuroscience
Volume 26 | February 2025 | 63–64 | 64

---PAGE BREAK---



