Chunk 1:
www.nature.com/npjparkd
REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Nitrosative stress in Parkinson’s disease
✉
Morgan G.Stykel1 and ScottD. Ryan 1,2
Parkinson’sDisease (PD)is aneurodegenerative disorder characterized, in part,by theloss of dopaminergicneurons withinthe
nigral-striatalpathway.Multiplelinesofevidencesupportaroleforreactivenitrogenspecies(RNS)indegenerationofthispathway,
specificallynitric oxide(NO).This reviewwill focuson howRNS leadstoloss of dopaminergicneurons inPDand whether RNS
accumulationrepresentsacentralsignalinthedegenerativecascade.Herein,weprovideanoverviewofhowRNSaccumulatesin
PDbyconsidering thevariouscellular sourcesofRNSincludingnNOS,iNOS,nitrate,andnitritereductionanddescribeevidence
thatthesesourcesareupregulatingRNSinPD.Wedocumentthatover1/3oftheproteinsthatdepositinLewyBodies,arepost-
translationallymodified(S-nitrosylated)byRNSandprovideabroaddescriptionofhowthiselicitsdeleteriouseffectsinneurons.In
doingso,weidentify specificproteins that aremodified by RNS inneuronswhich are implicatedin PDpathogenesis, with an
emphasisonexacerbationofsynucleinopathy.Hownitrationofalpha-synuclein(aSyn)leadstoaSynmisfoldingandtoxicityinPD
modelsis outlined. Furthermore, wedelineatehowRNS modulatesknown PD-relatedphenotypes including axo-dendritic-,
mitochondrial-,anddopamine-dysfunctions. Finally,wediscuss successfuloutcomes oftherapeutics thattarget S-nitrosylation of
proteinsinParkinson’sDiseaserelatedclinicaltrials.Inconclusion,wearguethattargetingRNSmaybeoftherapeuticbenefitfor
peopleinearly clinical stages ofPD.
npjParkinson’s Disease (2022) 8:104 ;https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-022-00370-3
INTRODUCTION neuronaldysfunctionandincreasedseverityandareaofaffliction
Parkinson’sdisease(PD)isthemostcommonmovementdisorder in a time dependent manner2–4. It has been reported that PD
affecting over 10 million individuals worldwide1. PD is character- patients have elevated RNS as indicated from increased levels of
ized by the degeneration of brain cell populations, most notab

Chunk 2:
/s41531-022-00370-3
INTRODUCTION neuronaldysfunctionandincreasedseverityandareaofaffliction
Parkinson’sdisease(PD)isthemostcommonmovementdisorder in a time dependent manner2–4. It has been reported that PD
affecting over 10 million individuals worldwide1. PD is character- patients have elevated RNS as indicated from increased levels of
ized by the degeneration of brain cell populations, most notably nitrite/nitrate in cerebral spinal fluid5 and blood6. More specifi-
the dopaminergic neurons emanating from the substantia nigra. cally,inPDithasbeenreportedthatwhitebloodcell-neutrophils
Nigrostriatal degeneration correlates with a decline in motor have higher expression of nNOS and an increased ability to
control generally resulting in bradykinesia, rigidity, or tremors. In
produceexcessNO7.Infact,Koutietal.reportedthatserumlevels
addition,manynon-motorsymptomssuchasconstipation,fatigue of nitric oxide positively correlated with increased UPDRS scores
or dementia may be concomitant. The neuronal loss in PD is
(UniversalParkinson’sdiseaseratingscale)anddurationofdisease
precededbymanyphenotypesdiscussedherein,withafocuson regardless of sex or age6; however, these findings are
axo-dendriticdefects,mitochondrialdysfunction,andsynucleino-
contentious8,9.
pathy. In this review, we describe how these phenotypes can be
attributedtoincreasesinreactivenitrogenspecies(RNS).Wefirst Increased enzymatic activity ofNOSiselevated in the PD
discusshowRNSisupregulatedinPD,wethendiscusstheeffects brain
of RNS on dopaminergic neurons, and then we describe how Neuronal nitric oxide synthetase (nNOS) is the primary source of
unchecked RNS leads to aSyn misfolding and Lewy body nitricoxide(NO)productioninneurons.nNOSisa161kdaenzyme
deposition.Inconclusion, weprovideanargumentthatreducing encoded by the NOS1 gene. Each nNOS has an oxygenase and
nitrosative stress early in disease may represent a means of reductase domain connected by a linker that is responsible for
delaying phenotypic progr

Chunk 3:
OS) is the primary source of
unchecked RNS leads to aSyn misfolding and Lewy body nitricoxide(NO)productioninneurons.nNOSisa161kdaenzyme
deposition.Inconclusion, weprovideanargumentthatreducing encoded by the NOS1 gene. Each nNOS has an oxygenase and
nitrosative stress early in disease may represent a means of reductase domain connected by a linker that is responsible for
delaying phenotypic progression in PD and protecting cells from calmodulin binding. The generation of NO occurs in two-steps,
degeneration. both requiring oxygen, NADPH, and an nNOS dimer (zinc
facilitatesthedimerizationofnNOS,enablingnNOSactivity).First,
intracellular Ca2+ catalyzes the binding of nNOS to calmodulin
SOURCES OFREACTIVENITROGEN SPECIESINPD and, in the presence of heme, hydroxylates L-arginine to N-
Nitrosative stress results primarily from the over-production of hydroxy-L-arginine. In this step, co-factors FAD and FMN aid the
nitrogen based free radicals: nitric oxide (NO−) and nitrogen electron transfer from the NADPH by the nNOS to the heme.
dioxide (NO −). These atoms possess unbalanced valence Second, N-hydroxy-L-arginine is oxidized to L-citrulline and NO
2
electrons and are therefore highly reactive and prone to filling with the aid of L-arginine and co-factor BH (Fig. 2). There are at
4
their outer valance shell with other atoms or molecules. Thiscan least four splice variants of nNOS: nNOSα, nNOSβ, nNOSγ, and
leadtoproductionofsecondaryfreeradicalssuchasperoxynitrite nNOSμ. nNOSα is the most dominant variant, primarily found in
(ONOO−)andhydroxideanion(OH−),aswellastoxicnon-radicals neurons.nNOScontainsaPDZdomainwhichallowsitsinteraction
suchashydrogenperoxide(H O ),dinitrogendioxide(N O ),and with other PDZ-domain containing proteins, thus influencing the
2 2 2 2
nitrousacid(HNO )(Fig.1).Althoughmanyofthesearepresentin cellularlocalizationofNOS.Assuch,nNOSisoftenlocalizedatthe
2
healthy neurons, several events can lead to their overproduction synaptic membrane due to its PD

Chunk 4:
 neurons.nNOScontainsaPDZdomainwhichallowsitsinteraction
suchashydrogenperoxide(H O ),dinitrogendioxide(N O ),and with other PDZ-domain containing proteins, thus influencing the
2 2 2 2
nitrousacid(HNO )(Fig.1).Althoughmanyofthesearepresentin cellularlocalizationofNOS.Assuch,nNOSisoftenlocalizedatthe
2
healthy neurons, several events can lead to their overproduction synaptic membrane due to its PDZ-interaction with PSD95 and
which, ultimately damages cellular components leading to PFK-M, forexample.
1TheDepartmentofMolecularandCellularBiology,TheUniversityofGuelph,GuelphONN1G2W1ON,Canada.2NeurodegenerativeDiseaseCenter,ScintillonInstitute,6868
✉
NancyRidgeDrive,SanDiego,CA92121,USA. email:sryan03@uoguelph.ca
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation
;,:)(0987654321

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
2
Fig. 1 Sources of reactive nitrogen species. Various formulas showing the production of reactive nitrogen species are displayed (a). The
knownreactionsbetweenRNSandthiolsarealsoshown(b).AcartoondepictingtheprimaryeffectsofvariousRNSandtheirintermediates
(c).ThisfigurewascreatedusingBiorender.
Post-mortem analysis of midbrain samples revealed that nNOS Another relevant isoform of NOS is inducible nitric oxide
expressionisincreasedinbrainregionsofPDpatientsrelativeto synthase (iNOS), which is expressed by glial cells such as
controls10. nNOS activity is also upregulated in animal models of astrocytes and macrophages. iNOS is an enzyme ~131kDa in
PD11,12. Similarly, in weaver mice where the spontaneous size,encodedbytheNOS2gene.LikenNOS,iNOSconsistsoftwo
depletion of dopaminergic neurons occurs, nNOS is increased in domains; an oxygenase and reductase domain which facilitates
the substantia nigra but not in other brain regions13. Together thebindingofcalmodulinandthesubsequentproductionofNO
these findings implicate nNOS activity in PD pathogenesis. nNOS through a series of electron transport events. Its activity is
activityishighlyregulatedbypost-translatio

Chunk 5:
of dopaminergic neurons occurs, nNOS is increased in domains; an oxygenase and reductase domain which facilitates
the substantia nigra but not in other brain regions13. Together thebindingofcalmodulinandthesubsequentproductionofNO
these findings implicate nNOS activity in PD pathogenesis. nNOS through a series of electron transport events. Its activity is
activityishighlyregulatedbypost-translationalmodificationsand regulated by protein interactions (e.g., kalirin), substrate and co-
factor availability (cationic amino acid transporter L-arginine).
interactingproteins.Forexample,thephosphorylationofSer847is
Unlike the constitutive expression of nNOS in neurons, iNOS is
inhibitory, while de-phosphorylation of Ser847 stimulates nNOS
stimulated, hence the term “inducible”. An operative distinction
activity14.Perhapsitisnotsurprisingthatdocosahexaenoicacid,a
between iNOS and nNOS is the ability of iNOS to bind to
supplementthatphosphorylatesnNOS(i.e.,inhibitsnNOSactivity)
calmodulin at much lower concentrations of calcium making NO
protects dopaminergic neurons from MPTP toxicity in rodent
production fromiNOS tenfold that ofnNOS-NOproduction21.
models of PD15. In addition, while a number of nNOS interacting
Elevated levels of iNOS have been found post-mortem in
proteinshavebeenidentified,HSP90(heat-shock protein90) has multipleneurodegenerativediseasesincludingParkinson’s-patient
been demonstrated to be an important regulator of protein brains22.Insupportofthisobservation, thereisheightenediNOS
homeostasis and plays a specific role in preventing aSyn expression in multiple animal models of PD using 6-OHDA23,
aggregation16ascribingitsignificanceinPD.Whilethesefindings MPTP24, and even aSyn oligomers25 whereas mice lacking iNOS
seem to suggest that HSP90 may have a protective role in PD, areresistanttomanyPD-inducingstressors26.Moreover,glialcells
HSP90 has also been shown to interact with and amplify nNOS readily populate brain regions with active neurodegeneration,
acti

Chunk 6:
al models of PD using 6-OHDA23,
aggregation16ascribingitsignificanceinPD.Whilethesefindings MPTP24, and even aSyn oligomers25 whereas mice lacking iNOS
seem to suggest that HSP90 may have a protective role in PD, areresistanttomanyPD-inducingstressors26.Moreover,glialcells
HSP90 has also been shown to interact with and amplify nNOS readily populate brain regions with active neurodegeneration,
activity17therebycontributingtoRNS.IncellmodelsofPD,HSP90 increasing the potential for high NO levels that can further
inhibitors have been shown to protect against PD-related exacerbatetoxicity insurrounding cells.
phenotype induction by preventing neurite loss and even aSyn
aggregation18,19. Likewise, knockdown of nNOS using siRNAs Nitratereduction as ameansofRNS generation
protects dopamine neurons in cell and animal models of PD20. IndependentlyofNOSfamilymembers,nitrate(NO −)andnitrite
Together these findings suggest that nNOS is upregulated in PD (NO −) can be reduced to NO or other RNS. Nitrate 3 s and nitrites
2
and that suppression of nNOS activity may prevent PD are commonly sourced from diet, most notably vegetables. The
pathogenesis. reduction of NO − to NO − is most frequently catalyzed by the
3 2
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation
;,:)(0987654321

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
3
system.Thetheorypostulatesthatexternalstressorsstimulatean
immuneresponseinthegut,whichtriggersandseedspathology
from the enteric system to the brain via the vagal nerve33. In
supportofthis,evidencesuggeststhatpathological(ormisfolded)
aSyninoculatedintotheduodenumcanspreadfromthegutinto
the brain of rodents36 and that severing the vagal nerve inhibits
this phenomenon37. Furthermore, oral administration of the
pesticide rotenone triggers synucleinopathy, which spreads from
the GI into the brain of inoculated mice34. This indicates that
toxins that elicit an oxidative stress response in the gut are
capable of triggering PD related sy

Chunk 7:
inoculatedintotheduodenumcanspreadfromthegutinto
the brain of rodents36 and that severing the vagal nerve inhibits
this phenomenon37. Furthermore, oral administration of the
pesticide rotenone triggers synucleinopathy, which spreads from
the GI into the brain of inoculated mice34. This indicates that
toxins that elicit an oxidative stress response in the gut are
capable of triggering PD related synucleinopathy. A study by
Sampson et al. suggested that gut microbiota may dictate PD-
motorphenotypes;asPD-patientfecaltransplantsintogermfree
animals triggered locomotor deficits, whereas fecal transplants
fromhealthyhumandonorshadnoeffectonlocomotorfunction.
Inthesamestudy,Sampsonetal.demonstratedthatsynucleino-
pathyitselfwasmarkedlyreducedingerm-freemicedespiteaSyn
overexpression38. As gut-brain connectivity is bi-directional, it is
Fig. 2 Primary production of NO occurs at the nitric oxide
plausiblethatPDpathologiesmightalsospreadfromtheCNSinto
synthase(NOS).NOSmaybeactivatedbyvariousions,proteins,or
enzymes.Toproducenitricoxide,NOSrequiresoxygen,NADPHand the gut. Indeed, 6-OHDA induced nigral-striatal brain lesions
L-arginine. The reductase (containing FMN) and oxygenase (heme- caused a reduction in fecal output39, further asserting a relation-
containing) domain are bound by calmodulin (CaM). To produce ship between the gut and brain. Moreover, transgenic human-
nitric oxide, oxygen and NADPH enter the reductase domain aSyn and MPTP-induced murine models of PD display GI-
facilitatingthetransferoftheelectronfromtheFAD,totheFMN,to dysfunction such as constipation in parallel with aSyn accumula-
the heme. This electron, along with oxygen, is needed to convert tion40. Fecal transplantation to MPTP-induced PD mice reduced
L-arginine into N-hydroxyl-L-arginine (monooxygenase reaction I).
PD-phenotypes41 suggesting that unidirectional gut-to-brain
Next, a second monooxygenase reaction involving an electron,
oxygenmoleculeandco-factorBH4occurstoconvertN-hydroxyl-L- communi

Chunk 8:
 with aSyn accumula-
the heme. This electron, along with oxygen, is needed to convert tion40. Fecal transplantation to MPTP-induced PD mice reduced
L-arginine into N-hydroxyl-L-arginine (monooxygenase reaction I).
PD-phenotypes41 suggesting that unidirectional gut-to-brain
Next, a second monooxygenase reaction involving an electron,
oxygenmoleculeandco-factorBH4occurstoconvertN-hydroxyl-L- communication predominates with respect to the influence on
argininetoL-citrullineandnitricoxide(NO).BH4isoxidizedtoBH2, motor phenotypes. It is therefore interesting to speculate as to
whichcanthen bereducedback toBH4,balancing NOSdimersin whether NO − or NO − imbalance in the gut contributes to the
3 2
an on (coupled)/off (uncoupled) state. NOS subunits are held spreadofsynucleinopathyfromtheentericnervoussystemtothe
togetherbyzinc(Zn)ionsthatbindtheoxygenasedomains.Output central nervoussystem.
from NOS includes L-citrulline, water, NADP and nitric oxide. This
figurewascreatedusingBiorender.
RNS-INDUCEDPRE-DEGENERATIVE DYSFUNCTION OF
DOPAMINERGIC NEURONS
gastro-intestinalmicrobiomewhichusesNO −toproduceenergy
2 NO-mediated alterations axo-dendritic function
and, in turn, generates nitrogen oxide by-products that can be
As discussed above, nNOS contains a PDZ domain that confers
absorbed into the body via the GI-tract. Alternatively, the
reduction of NO − can be catalyzed by mammalian NO − binding capacity to many post-synaptic density-proteins (e.g.,
reductases (e.g., 3 Xanthine oxidase)27 or in mitochondria 3 at PSD93/95, PFK-M, CAPON, and syntrophin) and is therefore
complexIII/ubiquinolcomplex28.NO −,utilizedasanNOreserve, regionally distributed along synaptic spines. This localization is
2 key to its canonical function, which is to promote NO-mediated
iscirculatedthroughoutthebodyandfurtherreducedtoNOwith
second messenger signaling. In this way, NO reacts with guanylyl
the help of enzymes (eg. xanthine oxidoreductase, aldehyde
cyclase to produce cyclic guanosine monophospha

Chunk 9:
inolcomplex28.NO −,utilizedasanNOreserve, regionally distributed along synaptic spines. This localization is
2 key to its canonical function, which is to promote NO-mediated
iscirculatedthroughoutthebodyandfurtherreducedtoNOwith
second messenger signaling. In this way, NO reacts with guanylyl
the help of enzymes (eg. xanthine oxidoreductase, aldehyde
cyclase to produce cyclic guanosine monophosphate which is
oxidase),carrierproteins(e.g.,deoxyhemoglobin,neuroglobin),or
co-factors (e.g., ascorbic acid) in various tissues. Indeed, dietary important for regulating neuronal dynamics including outgrowth
NO −increasesNO −availabilitytothebrain29wherehighlevels and synaptic plasticity42. In addition, NO has a major role in
3 2
of ascorbate might facilitate the conversion of NO − to NO30. It regulating synaptic activity through s-nitrosylation and/or transni-
has been further hypothesized that NO − reduction 2 in the brain trosylation of proteins43–45. In the healthy state, NO protects
2
may replace NOS-derived NO production when NOS is compro- neurons from hyperexcitability by s-nitrosylating and inhibiting
mised,asinstatesofhypoxiaorischemia31.Thiseventmayoccur
NMDARs(SNO-NMDAR)46.Choietal.werethefirsttodescribethe
atmitochondria32.NOmayfurtherreactwithothernitrogenoxide, mechanism wherebyNOinhibits the NMDAR via s-nitrosylation of
oxide, or superoxide radicals to produce the potent nitrating cysteine 399 on the NMDAR-subunit NR2A46. NO has also been
agents ONOO−, N O , or NO . Whether dietary-derived NO − or shown to protect neurons from hyperexcitability by regulating
2 3 2 3
NO −contribute significantlytoNOinthebrain remainsunclear, AMPAR expression, a major component of ionotropic glutamate
2
yetalinkbetweengutmicrobiomeandphenotypicPD-onsethas signaling.AMPARsurfaceexpressionisincreased(SNO-Stargazin)or
recentlybeenproposed33,34. decreased (SNO-Thorase) in response to S-nitrosylation of respec-
It is reported that PD patients have altered gut microbial tiveregulatory

Chunk 10:
O −contribute significantlytoNOinthebrain remainsunclear, AMPAR expression, a major component of ionotropic glutamate
2
yetalinkbetweengutmicrobiomeandphenotypicPD-onsethas signaling.AMPARsurfaceexpressionisincreased(SNO-Stargazin)or
recentlybeenproposed33,34. decreased (SNO-Thorase) in response to S-nitrosylation of respec-
It is reported that PD patients have altered gut microbial tiveregulatoryproteins47,48.Moreover,inneuronsNOitselfcanact
ecosystems relative to healthy controls. More specifically, PD as a neurotransmitter; regulating calcium signaling49, stimulating
patientshavedecreaseshortchainfattyacids(causingdecreased extracellularvesiclereleaseandendocytosis50,andiseveninvolved
vitamin levels) as well as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, with learning and memory formation through its activation of
which perpetuates oxidative and nitrosative stress in the gut. CREB51andretrogradetransmissionfromthepost-topre-synaptic
Patientsalsohaveincreasedlevelsofgut-aSynrelativetohealthy terminal, stimulating neurotransmitter release and long-term
controls, and this is observed years before motor symptoms potentiation52. However, when in excess, as is the case in PD-
arise35. Indeed, in the last decade several groups have put forth neurons, NO alters axo-dendritic function impairing synaptic
studiesthatsupportthetheorythatPDoriginatesinthegutand signaling,vesiculartrafficking,anddopaminehomeostasis(Fig.3).
thatovertimepathologyspreadsintothebrain.Thisisbelievedto The aberrant s-nitrosylation of synaptic proteins is believed to
be possible through the connectivity of the enteric neurons leadtothedysregulationofsynapticactivityinPD-neurons.While
located in the gastrointestinal wall and the central nervous the exact effects of superfluous NO or its derivatives on synaptic
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
4
Fig.3 RNS-induceddysfunctionsinParkinson’sdisease.Thisschematichighlights

Chunk 11:
teric neurons leadtothedysregulationofsynapticactivityinPD-neurons.While
located in the gastrointestinal wall and the central nervous the exact effects of superfluous NO or its derivatives on synaptic
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
4
Fig.3 RNS-induceddysfunctionsinParkinson’sdisease.ThisschematichighlightsthemajorphenotypesthatariseasaconsequenceofRNS
inPD.Thisincludesaxo-dendriticdefects(a),mitochondrialdefects(b)anddopamine-induceddefects(c)discussedinthisreview.Thisfigure
wascreatedusingBiorender.
function in PD have not been fully elucidated, there is evidence in vesicles to protect dopamine from oxidation and degradation.
thatexcessNOaltersaxo-dendriticfunction,specificallyimpairing Ultimately, Redondo et al. show that the loss of kinesin proteins
neurite length through the S-nitrosylation of protein disulfide ledtoareduction inaxonal lengthand neuron survival62.
isomerase or microtubule associated protein 1b, and causing
synapticspinelossthroughthehyperactivityofCyclic-dependent
EffectsofNO onmitochondrial function in neurons
kinase 5 (CDK5) following CDK5 S-nitrosylation53,54. These axo-
In a healthy system NO has been ascribed a role in regulating
dendritic impairments alter network connectivity, which is
mitochondrial function. In 1994, Brown and Cooper provided
associated with cognitive decline and even neuronal death. NO
evidence that NO alters mitochondrial respiration. They showed
also regulates NMDAR-excitotoxicity55 that can be further
that in isolated synaptosomes low levels of NO compete with
exacerbated by SNO-Src and SNO-SHP-256,57. Src, a family of
oxygen to inhibit or activate cytochrome c, respectively64. Since
proteinstyrosinekinases,wasfoundtobeactivated byautopho-
mitochondria cluster to regions where the demand for ATP is
sphorylationandS-nitrosylationleadingtothephosphorylationof
heightened, such as the synapse, it is possible that NO regulates
NMD

Chunk 12:
w levels of NO compete with
exacerbated by SNO-Src and SNO-SHP-256,57. Src, a family of
oxygen to inhibit or activate cytochrome c, respectively64. Since
proteinstyrosinekinases,wasfoundtobeactivated byautopho-
mitochondria cluster to regions where the demand for ATP is
sphorylationandS-nitrosylationleadingtothephosphorylationof
heightened, such as the synapse, it is possible that NO regulates
NMDAR subunit NR2B and the subsequent increase of NMDAR
mitochondrial oxygen consumption in order to maintain ATP
activity. Additionally, NMDAR excitotoxicity is also regulated by
supply. This regulation would be particularly important in the
SHP-2, a Src homology-2 domain containing phosphatase. SHP-2
context of substantia-nigral dopaminergic neurons given their
has been shown to promote cell survival via ERK1/2 pathway,
complex arborization and pace-making activity. Moreover,
while nitrosylation of SHP-2 inhibits its phosphatase activity.
Indeed, NMDAR-dependent calcium influx triggers nNOS to substantia-nigral dopaminergic neurons have fast spiking Ca2+
transientsthatincreasetheintracellularconcentrationofCa2+that
generate NO thereby compounding the effects of SNO-Src and
issubsequentlybuffered,inpart,bymitochondria.Notonlydoes
SNO-SHP-2 and further contributing to NMDAR-mediated excito-
this put mitochondria at risk for Ca2+ overload leading to
toxicity.Moreover,NOhasbeenshowntoinducethesynthesisof
NO per se58, indicating that the superfluous levels of NO in PD excitotoxicity and/or apoptosis, but Ca2+ that is not buffered
mightlead toa viciousloopof NOproduction. may further stimulate nNOS-generated NO. Together, mitochon-
Recent evidence suggests another important function ofNOis drial- NO reacts with superoxide produced by mitochondria to
to regulate intracellular trafficking of vesicles and cargo. We and
promotetheproductionofthehighlytoxicONOO−.Studieshave
othershaveshownthatPDpatientderiveddopaminergicneurons shown that ONOO− can impair mitochondrial-ATP synthesis
ar

Chunk 13:
ulate nNOS-generated NO. Together, mitochon-
Recent evidence suggests another important function ofNOis drial- NO reacts with superoxide produced by mitochondria to
to regulate intracellular trafficking of vesicles and cargo. We and
promotetheproductionofthehighlytoxicONOO−.Studieshave
othershaveshownthatPDpatientderiveddopaminergicneurons shown that ONOO− can impair mitochondrial-ATP synthesis
areparticularlysusceptibletonitrosativestress59,60.Thesestudies through inhibition of mitochondrial respiratory complexes,
demonstrated that low doses of agrochemicals, which had no mitochondrial polarization, and detoxifying enzymes in addition
effectonisogeniccontrolneurons,causedthenitrationoftubulin topromoting mitophagy65,66.
and impaired KIF5b transport of mitochondria in neurons Many mitochondrial-related proteins are reported to be S-
harboring aSyn mutations61. Moreover, Redondo et al. show that nitrosylated, both endogenously and in response to stimuli.
NOreducesKIF5AandKIF21Bexpressioninneurons62,suggesting Indeed,Changetal.usedthebiotin-switchLC-MS/MSmethodto
that an upregulation of NO in PD would cause a reduction of detect S-nitrosylated proteins in isolated rat brain-derived
anterogradetrafficking.Thelossofkinesin-drivenaxonaltransport mitochondriaidentifyings-nitrosylatedmitochondrialtargetsthat
would likely have many consequences for neurons such as (1) include: pyruvate dehydrogenase, succinyl-CoA ligase, complex I,
energetic deficits given that cells would have impairments in VDAC(voltagedependentanionchannel),andprohibitin(PHB)67.
transport of metabolic enzymes. This defect would particularly Still others have performed various SNO-capture methods
affectenergyproductionatthesynapsewherethereexistsalarge (SNOSID,SNOTrap,Phenylmercury(MRC))onwholebrainextracts
energeticdemand.Wecanspeculatethatanotherconsequenceof or primary cultured neurons to generate global lists of SNO-
decreased transport in neurons would be (2) reduced neuro- modified proteins. While t

Chunk 14:
his defect would particularly Still others have performed various SNO-capture methods
affectenergyproductionatthesynapsewherethereexistsalarge (SNOSID,SNOTrap,Phenylmercury(MRC))onwholebrainextracts
energeticdemand.Wecanspeculatethatanotherconsequenceof or primary cultured neurons to generate global lists of SNO-
decreased transport in neurons would be (2) reduced neuro- modified proteins. While the implications of each of these
transmitter production, given that enzymes that synthesize modifications have not been fully elucidated, the exuberant
neurotransmitters are required to be trafficked to the synapse increase in RNS in PD would likely increase the number of
via vesicles. The latter defect may be exacerbated by the mitochondrial targets nitrosylated in the disease setting. Studies
S-nitrosylation of VMAT2 (vesicular monoamine transporter)63, indicate that the S-nitrosylation of the electron transport chain,
which has been shown to be important for the transport of the citric acid cycle, carnitine/acylcarnitine transporter and the
enzymes responsible for dopamine synthesis (e.g., tyrosine nitration of HSP90 impairs metabolism68,69. Together, these
hydroxylaseandAADC)aswellasimportantforstoringdopamine studies suggest that RNS-altered mitochondrial targets leads to
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
5
alossoffunction.Ontheotherhand,thenitrosylationofvoltage- synthesisindopaminecellscausestheinhibitionofmitochondrial
dependent anion channel 1, a component of the mitochondrial complex I in either a NO- or ONOO−-dependent manner,
permeabilitytransitionpore,isbelievedtotriggertheopeningof depending on whether the treatment was acute or chronic,
the channel leading to a gain of function67. Consequently, this respectively89,90.WhilethenatureoftheinteractionbetweenNO,
leads to Ca + dyshomeostasis and mitochondrial depolarization, DOPACandcomplexIremainselusive,itislikelytoplayapart

Chunk 15:
 I in either a NO- or ONOO−-dependent manner,
permeabilitytransitionpore,isbelievedtotriggertheopeningof depending on whether the treatment was acute or chronic,
the channel leading to a gain of function67. Consequently, this respectively89,90.WhilethenatureoftheinteractionbetweenNO,
leads to Ca + dyshomeostasis and mitochondrial depolarization, DOPACandcomplexIremainselusive,itislikelytoplayapartin
2
cytochromecreleaseandapopotosomeformation,permeabiliza- theearly declineof dopaminergicneurons inPD.
tionoftheoutermitochondrialmembraneaswellascausingthe
hyperproduction and release of O − and H O leading to other
2 2 2
free radical damage70. It has, however, been reported that the ROLEOFRNS INPROTEINMISFOLDING ANDLEWY BODY
effectsofNOonVDACisconcentrationdependent:lowdosesof DEPOSITION
NOblockthechannel,whilehighdosesofNOopenthechannel71. Alpha-Synuclein protofibrilformation in PD
While we have just described some of the deleterious effect of Many causal aSyn mutations have been identified (A30P, A53T,
RNS on mitochondrial proteins, the specific effects in PD remain E46K, G51D, duplication, and triplication) in PD patients. While
poorlycharacterized. familial forms of PD only account for about 10% of cases, the
In addition to mitochondrial proteins that can be nitrosylated, presence of aSyn in Lewy-bodies of sporadic PD cases highlights
extra-mitochondrial proteins that affect mitochondrial function its importance to multiple disease stratifications. Although the
are susceptible to nitrosylation or nitration leading to altered processes driving Lewy body formation are not well understood,
mitochondrialdynamics.Forinstance,whilenitrosylationofCREB muchisknownabouthowaSynfibrillizationcontributestoLewy
mayenhanceitsabilitytobindDNAandleadstotheupregulation Body pathology. aSyn is a 14kDa protein consisting of three
of mitochondrial-biogenesis genes72, the nitration of PPAR has domains: the amino-terminus, the non-amyloid β-component
been shown to impede the expression 

Chunk 16:
ll understood,
mitochondrialdynamics.Forinstance,whilenitrosylationofCREB muchisknownabouthowaSynfibrillizationcontributestoLewy
mayenhanceitsabilitytobindDNAandleadstotheupregulation Body pathology. aSyn is a 14kDa protein consisting of three
of mitochondrial-biogenesis genes72, the nitration of PPAR has domains: the amino-terminus, the non-amyloid β-component
been shown to impede the expression of mitochondrial pro- (NAC), and the carboxyl-terminal domain. In solution, aSyn exists
teins73.Parkin(i.e.,Park2)isanE3ubiquitinligasethatisbelieved primarily as an unstructured random-coil. Since the amino-
to play an important role in directing misfolded proteins for terminus is amphipathic, consisting of seven KTKEGV repeat
degradation via the ubiquitin-protease system74 and helps sequences,aSynreconfiguresintoanα-helicalformwhenbound
regulate mitochondrial dynamics through mitochondrial biogen- to anionic phospholipid membranes. Although the function of
esis, import of mitochondrial proteins and mitophagy (targeting aSyn remains poorly characterized, most evidence supports
mitochondriatophagosomes)75.Inhumans,Parkinmutationsare functions at the synapse, regulating vesicle storage, dopamine
associated with autosomal recessive familial PD. Moreover, SNO- synthesis and neurotransmission. When misfolded, aSyn repre-
Parkin is more present in PD patients and in rotenone or MPTP- sentsthemajorcomponentofβ-sheet-richcytoplasmicinclusions
treatedmicethancontrols76,77.SNO-Parkinleadstomitochondrial withinLewybodies,whichaccumulatepriortoneurodegeneration
depolarizationwhereasSNO-PINK1decreasesParkintranslocation in PD. Prior to deposition into Lewy bodies, aSyn protofibrils (or
to mitochondrial membranes, disrupting mitophagy78,79. In oligomers) accumulate. In PD, aSyn oligomers are conformation-
addition, the S-nitrosylation of the mitochondrial chaperone ally self-templating and able to cross-seed with other structural
protein PHB has actually been shown to be neuroprotective

Chunk 17:
ecreasesParkintranslocation in PD. Prior to deposition into Lewy bodies, aSyn protofibrils (or
to mitochondrial membranes, disrupting mitophagy78,79. In oligomers) accumulate. In PD, aSyn oligomers are conformation-
addition, the S-nitrosylation of the mitochondrial chaperone ally self-templating and able to cross-seed with other structural
protein PHB has actually been shown to be neuroprotective conformers of aSyn91. What’s more, oligomers actively recruit
against stress evoked by oxygen and glucose deprivation80; other proteins into aggregates92. aSyn oligomers can also
however, PHB’s expression is reportedly reduced in PD patient propagate between cells through synaptically linked regions of
brains81 suggesting PD neurons are more susceptible to this the brain93,94, exo-endocytosis95, tunneling nanotubes96 or by
stress. In PD patient brain tissue and cellular models of PD, receptor mediation (e.g., Lag3)97 leading to the pathological
S-nitrosylation of peroxiredoxin (PrxII) decreases peroxidase spread ofsynucleinopathy. aSynoligomers canalso permeabilize
activity causing H O to accumulate, exasperating oxidative lipid membranes98, trigger mitochondrial dysfunction99, proteo-
2 2
stress82. static stress100–102, and impair synaptic function103. Although the
pathological progression of aSyn and Lewy Body pathology can
EffectsofNO ondopamine homeostasis in neurons bevariable,thepatterningistypicallypredictive:beginninginthe
medulla, continuing into the midbrain, and finally infecting the
The unique susceptibility of dopaminergic neurons to nitrosative
cortex104.ItremainscontroversialwhetheraSynper-seormature
stress,mayrelate todopaminesynthesisand catabolism.Indeed,
Lewy bodies ultimately trigger cell death. While Lewy-bodies
the dopamine synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase can be
appear to trigger cell death by blocking intracellular-transport as
inactivated by tyrosine nitration, reducing intracellular dopamine
well as impairing mitochondrial and synaptic fun

Chunk 18:
troversialwhetheraSynper-seormature
stress,mayrelate todopaminesynthesisand catabolism.Indeed,
Lewy bodies ultimately trigger cell death. While Lewy-bodies
the dopamine synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase can be
appear to trigger cell death by blocking intracellular-transport as
inactivated by tyrosine nitration, reducing intracellular dopamine
well as impairing mitochondrial and synaptic function, they may
levels83,84. In addition, NO also catalyzes the auto-oxidation of
develop in response to sequestration of aSyn oligomers that are
dopamine (via quinones and semiquinones)85 causing protein-,
highlytoxic.
lipid-, or DNA- dopamine-adducts that can lead to neurodegen-
eration. What’s more, dopamine itself can react with many RNS
including nitric dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and dinitrogen trioxide RNSpotentiatesaSynmisfoldingandpathologicaldeposition
forming 6-nitrosodopamine which can further react with RNS to Nitration of aSyn can potentiate aSyn-oligomer formation.
produce 6-nitrodopamine which can then produce other radicals Oxidative modification to tyrosine can occur in one of two ways:
and RNS86. Together these findings suggest that dopaminergic a hydrogen atom in the 3′ position of a tyrosine ring can be
neurons are vulnerable to nitrosative stress due, in part, to the replaced with a nitro-group (3-Nitro-Tyrosine (3NT)), or tyrosines
presence of dopamine per se. RNS-altered dopamine may can react with each other to form 3,3′-dityrosine crosslinks.
dysregulatedopamine homeostasis andfurther intensify RNS. ExposureofaSyntonitratingagentscanencourageo,o′-dityrosine
The effects of RNS on mitochondria also has specific implica- crosslinkingbetweentheN-domaintyrosine(Y39)andC-terminal
tionsfordopaminergicneuronssincethebreakdownofdopamine tyrosines (Y125, Y133, Y136) to generate aSyn-dimers that are
by the mitochondrial localized enzyme monoamine oxidase morepronetooligomerformation105–108.Perhapsunsurprisingly,
producesthemetabolite3,4-dihydroxyphenylaceticaci

Chunk 19:
The effects of RNS on mitochondria also has specific implica- crosslinkingbetweentheN-domaintyrosine(Y39)andC-terminal
tionsfordopaminergicneuronssincethebreakdownofdopamine tyrosines (Y125, Y133, Y136) to generate aSyn-dimers that are
by the mitochondrial localized enzyme monoamine oxidase morepronetooligomerformation105–108.Perhapsunsurprisingly,
producesthemetabolite3,4-dihydroxyphenylaceticacid(DOPAC) mutated aSyn (A30P and A53T) has an increased propensity for
whoseinteractionwithNOcanimpairmitochondrialrespiration87. dityrosine cross-linking107. Additionally, tyrosines play an impor-
The combination of DOPAC and NO was shown to also cause a tant role in aSyn-vesicle binding while nitration impairs this
decreaseinglutathione88.Glutathione,athiol-reducingagentand interaction (making the charge more negative at the N-terminal
antioxidantresponsibleforthebreakdownofH O ,isknowntobe domain,orcausingaconformationalchangewhentheC-terminal
2 2
dysregulated in PD patients. Indeed, decreasing glutathione domain is nitrated) thereby increasing the amount of aSyn in a
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
6
random coil or beta-sheet conformation and thus shifting MPP+ or LPS122. That parkin is heavily nitrosylated in models of
equilibrium toward oligomer formation105,106,109. It has also been aSyn overexpression is perhaps not surprising given reports that
suggested that nitrated aSyn promotes the seeding of aSyn- Parkin cysteine oxidation is linked to redox balance in human
oligomers fromcell-to-cell110. midbrain123 and that Parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-
ThereexistsevidencethatnitrationofaSyncanalsopotentiate induced cell death124. Studies from human stem-cell-derived
fibril formation. In cells exposed to ONOO−, formation of aSyn dopaminergic neurons have shown that neurons harboring the
aggregates is dependent on nitro-tyrosine adduct formation111, endogenous aSyn-A53T mut

Chunk 20:
o-cell110. midbrain123 and that Parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-
ThereexistsevidencethatnitrationofaSyncanalsopotentiate induced cell death124. Studies from human stem-cell-derived
fibril formation. In cells exposed to ONOO−, formation of aSyn dopaminergic neurons have shown that neurons harboring the
aggregates is dependent on nitro-tyrosine adduct formation111, endogenous aSyn-A53T mutation have increased kinetics of NO
supporting the notion that that protein nitration may serve as a synthesis and are more susceptible to RNS-toxins59,61. Moreover,
biomarkerofPD.Indeed,nitratedaSynisalmostexclusivelyfound mutantaSyn(A53TandE46K)neuronshaveincreasedbasallevels
in the insoluble protein fraction making aSyn more resistant to of S-nitrosylated proteins relative to isogenic controls. In fact,
degradation, more compact, and more stable112,113. Moreover, when considering reports on the constituents of Lewy Bodies125,
mutatingaSyn-tyrosineY39residuetophenylalaninereducesthe onethirdoftheproteinsdepositedaremodifiedbyS-nitrosylation
ability of aSyn to fibrilize105,113. Many studies have also demon- (Table 1). With respect to protein nitration, Tapias et al. showed
strated that nitrating-aSyn through the addition of nitrating that inoculation of aSyn preformed fibrils into mice and nonhu-
agents(eg.ONOO−orTMN)promotesnon-amyloidogenicβ-sheet man primate brains caused an accumulation of 3NT-modified
oligomersanddimers,asopposedtofibrils105,112–114.Inthisway,it proteins, particularly in dopaminergic neurons25. Together, these
hasbeensuggestedthatnitrationofaSynmightoccurpost-fibril- findingssuggestcrosstalkbetweenaSynandRNSwithrespectto
formation and function to stabilize aSyn in its new form. Taken pathologicaldeposition ofprotein aggregates inPD.
together, these studies suggest that tyrosine nitration can
augment fibril formation by promoting dityrosine crosslinking
capable of seeding pathology and may in addition represent a TARGETINGRNS AS A PDTHERAPY
post-fibril

Chunk 21:
-fibril- findingssuggestcrosstalkbetweenaSynandRNSwithrespectto
formation and function to stabilize aSyn in its new form. Taken pathologicaldeposition ofprotein aggregates inPD.
together, these studies suggest that tyrosine nitration can
augment fibril formation by promoting dityrosine crosslinking
capable of seeding pathology and may in addition represent a TARGETINGRNS AS A PDTHERAPY
post-fibrilmodification that functions tostabilize fibrils. ReducingRNS by targeting NOS
InPDpatients,aSynitselfwasshowntobeatleastonetargetof Upregulating proteins that interact with or inhibit nNOS activity
nitration in PD-patient brain samples. Indeed, higher RNS and may represent a means of mitigating PD pathogenesis. The
nitratedaSyninPD-patientserumlevelscorrelateswithworsened specific nNOS inhibitor 7-nitroindazole protects against dopami-
PD-related outcomes115. Moreover, nitrated aSyn was specifically nergic neuron depletion in animals treated with 6OHDA126 or
identified within Lewy-body-like and insoluble inclusions116. MPTP12, even preventing motor impairments such as apomor-
Overexpression of aSyn in HEK293 cells lead to intracellular phine induced contralateral rotations127 and catalepsy12. nNOS
inclusionsfollowingexposuretoaNOdonorandoxidizingagents inhibition by N nitro-L-arginine methyl ester can reduce NO
or ONOO−111,117. Likewise, in mice treated with MPTP, which accumulation in w human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-
causes the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons, immunopre- derived PD neurons (harboring the A53T-SNCA mutation)
cipitationofaSynandsubsequentwestern-blotanalysisindicated protecting neurons from mitochondrial dysfunction61 and rescu-
thataSynwasnitratedasearlyas4hfollowingMPTPtreatment117. ing axodendritic pathology128. Likewise, treatment with docosa-
Despite the fact that very few proteins undergo nitration, hexaenoic acid causes the phosphorylation of nNOS that in turn
increased levels of nitrated-aSyn in PD patients suggests that decreasesn

Chunk 22:
lotanalysisindicated protecting neurons from mitochondrial dysfunction61 and rescu-
thataSynwasnitratedasearlyas4hfollowingMPTPtreatment117. ing axodendritic pathology128. Likewise, treatment with docosa-
Despite the fact that very few proteins undergo nitration, hexaenoic acid causes the phosphorylation of nNOS that in turn
increased levels of nitrated-aSyn in PD patients suggests that decreasesnNOSactivitypreventingPD-likemotordeficitsinMPTP
nitrationmightbe linked toPD-pathology. treatment in mice15. While inhibiting NOS may seem to be an
Nitrated-aSyn likely has many functional consequences. An obvioustherapy,thisiscomplicatedbythefactthatnitricoxideis
invitroassaybyMishizen-Eberzetal.demonstratedthatnitrated integral for physiological function, particularly for the vascular
aSynfibrilswereabletobecleavedbycalpain1justasun-nitrated system.Inaddition,NOinhibitionhasbeenshowntoberelatedto
aSyn-fibrils were. However, the authors noted that the cleaved insulinresistance and cancause other adverse sideeffects.
fibrils from nitrated-aSyn formed uniquely structured fragments AsanalternativetoNOSinhibition,genesilencingbyinterfering
whichwerewiderandhadamoreexposedNACdomainrelative RNAs (iRNAs) could degrade RNAs that are integral for NOS
tothecleavageofun-nitratedaSynfibrils.Inaddition,thenitrated- synthesis. iRNAs are delivered to cells through viral (e.g.,
aSynfragmentspromotedtherecruitmentofsolubleaSynintoits nanoparticle or liposomes) non-viral vectors (e.g., adeno-
aggregate118, suggesting that the nitration of aSyn might seed associated virus or retrovirus). Similar to the protection from PD-
pathologymoreefficientlythannon-nitratedaSynfibril-fragments. phenotypesexhibitedbynNOSknockoutmice129,striatalinocula-
Moreover,nitrationofaSynhasbeenshowntoincreasetherateof tion of iRNA targeting-nNOS reduced 6-OHDA toxicity by
fibrillization and simultaneously slow the rate of proteolytic preventing dopaminergic neuron degeneration and behavioral
degradation (e.g., clea

Chunk 23:
the protection from PD-
pathologymoreefficientlythannon-nitratedaSynfibril-fragments. phenotypesexhibitedbynNOSknockoutmice129,striatalinocula-
Moreover,nitrationofaSynhasbeenshowntoincreasetherateof tion of iRNA targeting-nNOS reduced 6-OHDA toxicity by
fibrillization and simultaneously slow the rate of proteolytic preventing dopaminergic neuron degeneration and behavioral
degradation (e.g., cleavage by calpain1)106. In addition, when impairments in rats20. Clinical trials are ongoing that employ the
cellsandmicewereexposedtoaSynornitrated-aSyn,thenitrated useofiRNAsforPD,thusspecifictargetingofNOSintheSNpcto
aSyn was more toxic as it causes dopamine-cells to degenerate decrease RNS maybe feasiblein thefuture.
and mice to perform more poorly on behavioral motor-
coordination assays119.
Antioxidants to reduce RNS
Some studies have shown that scavenging RNS may also be one
Increased aSyncorrelates withincreases in RNS waytoattenuatePDpathologies.Onewaytoaccomplishthisisto
There exists evidence that strongly suggests a positive-feedback inhibit NADPH oxidase (NOX), which is responsible for the
correlation between aSyn and RNS. Several reports have formation of O − and, subsequently, the formation of ONOO−.
2
determined that aSyn accumulation leads to increased NO In vitro experiments by Schildknecht et al. showed that the NOX
generation and s-nitrosylation of proteins implicated in PD inhibitor GTK136901 reduced the amount of ONOO−, prevented
pathogenesis.InbrainsofsporadicPDpatientswithdiffuseLewy alpha-synuclein nitration, and protected human dopaminergic
bodies,s-nitrosylationofParkin120,p53120,PTEN,andDJ-1121have cellsfromONOO−toxicity130.Similarly,minocyclin,ascavengerof
beenreportedthatresultfromaninterlinkedmechanismoftrans- ONOO− [194], has also been shown to reduce ONOO− in a LPS
nitrosylation leading to degeneration of nigral neurons. aSyn model of PD, preventing 3-NT immunoreactivity131. Moreover,
overexpressing transgenic mice show elevated levels of minoc

Chunk 24:
tionofParkin120,p53120,PTEN,andDJ-1121have cellsfromONOO−toxicity130.Similarly,minocyclin,ascavengerof
beenreportedthatresultfromaninterlinkedmechanismoftrans- ONOO− [194], has also been shown to reduce ONOO− in a LPS
nitrosylation leading to degeneration of nigral neurons. aSyn model of PD, preventing 3-NT immunoreactivity131. Moreover,
overexpressing transgenic mice show elevated levels of minocyclin has also been shown to prevent 6-OHDA and MPTP
S-nitrosylated Parkin and PINK1 and defects in mitochondrial dopaminergic neuronal degeneration though its inhibition of
quality control79, whereas aSyn-knockout cells and mice are iNOS-producedNO132,133.Together,thesefindingssuggestadual-
resistanttothedeleterious effectsofRNSelicitedbyexposure to role mechanism of action for minocyclin (1) scavenging ONOO−
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
7
Table1. IdentifiedconstituentsofLewyBodiesthatarepronetoS-nitrosylation.
ProteinName EvidenceofSNO UniProt-Function
modification
14-3-3proteinepsilon 161,162 Adapterprotein
Actin,cytoplasmic1 163–167 Producesfilamentousnetworks,aidsincellmotility
Alpha-internexin 168–171 Intermediatefilament,importantforneuronalcytoskeletonstructure
ATPsynthasebetachain,mitochondrial 165,172 Partofthemitochondrial-electrontransportchainthatgeneratesATP
precursor
Betatubulin 161,170,173,174 Majorcomponentofmicrotubules
ClathrinheavyChain1 161,170 Amajorconstituentofthepolyhedralcoatingonvesicles,playsarolein
autophagosomeformation
Creatinekinase,Bchain 161,163,166,170,172 TransfersphosphatebetweenATPandphosphogens
DNM1protein 175 Mediatesmitochondrialmembranefission
Dynamin3 175 Aidsinmicrotubulebundlingandlikelyvesiculartrafficking
Dynein,cytoplasmic,heavypolypeptide1 170 Retrogradetransport
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 161,163,165,176–178 Playsaroleinglycolysis,modulatescytoskeletonassembly,signalsnucleartarget
dehydrogenase proteins
Gelsolinprecursor 165 Regula

Chunk 25:
72 TransfersphosphatebetweenATPandphosphogens
DNM1protein 175 Mediatesmitochondrialmembranefission
Dynamin3 175 Aidsinmicrotubulebundlingandlikelyvesiculartrafficking
Dynein,cytoplasmic,heavypolypeptide1 170 Retrogradetransport
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 161,163,165,176–178 Playsaroleinglycolysis,modulatescytoskeletonassembly,signalsnucleartarget
dehydrogenase proteins
Gelsolinprecursor 165 Regulatesactinassembly
Glucosephosphateisomerase 179 Partoftheglycolysispathway
Heatshockprotein86(HSP90) 170,180 Molecularchaperoneandtranscriptionalmodulator
Isocitratedehydrogenase[NAD]subunit 170,181 Subunitoftheenzymethatcatalyzesthedecarboxylationofisocitrateintoalpha-
alpha,mitochondrialprecursor ketoglutarate
Microtubule-associatedprotein1B 54,170,176,182 Helpsregulatemicrotubuledynamics
Microtubule-associatedproteintau 176,183 Helpsinmicrotubuleassemblyandstability
isoform2
Neurofilamentlightpolypeptide 167 Intermediateneurofilament,abiomarkerofaxonaldamage
Neurofilament3(150kDamedium) 166,167 Structuralcomponentofthecytoskeleton
Plectin6 170,184 Interlinksintermediatefilamentswithmicrotubulesandmicrofilamentsandanchors
intermediatefilamentstodesmosomesorhemidesmosomes.
Sodium/potassium-transportingATPase 161,163,167,176 CatalyticcomponentoftheATPase.
alpha-2chainprecursor
Spectrinalphachain,brain 167,170,185 Calcium-dependentmovementofthecytoskeleton.Molecularscaffoldprotein.Links
theplasmamembranetothecytoskeleton.
SpliceIsoform1ofClathrinheavychain2 170 Amajorconstituentofthepolyhedralcoatingonvesicles,playsarolein
autophagosomeformation
SpliceIsoform1ofDesmoplakin 165 Linksintermediatefilaments,actinandmicrotubulenetworks.
SpliceIsoform1ofDynamin2 175,186 Ubiquitouslyexpressed.Aidsinmicrotubulebundlingandlikelyvesiculartrafficking
SpliceIsoform1ofHeatshockcognate 161–163,167,170 Molecularchaperonethatworkswithco-chaperonestoactivateproteolysis,refolds
71kDaprotein(HSC70) andtransportsproteinsandeventargetsproteinsfordegradation.
SpliceIsoform1ofMicrotubule- 176 Stabi

Chunk 26:
ntermediatefilaments,actinandmicrotubulenetworks.
SpliceIsoform1ofDynamin2 175,186 Ubiquitouslyexpressed.Aidsinmicrotubulebundlingandlikelyvesiculartrafficking
SpliceIsoform1ofHeatshockcognate 161–163,167,170 Molecularchaperonethatworkswithco-chaperonestoactivateproteolysis,refolds
71kDaprotein(HSC70) andtransportsproteinsandeventargetsproteinsfordegradation.
SpliceIsoform1ofMicrotubule- 176 Stabilizesmicrotubules.
associatedprotein2
SpliceIsoform1ofPlectin1 170,184 Interlinksintermediatefilamentswithmicrotubulesandmicrofilamentsandanchors
intermediatefilamentstodesmosomesorhemidesmosomes.
SpliceIsoform1ofSpectrinbetachain, 170,185 Calcium-dependentmovementofthecytoskeleton.Molecularscaffoldprotein.Links
brain1 theplasmamembranetothecytoskeleton.
SpliceIsoform1ofVoltage-dependent 165,170,176 Mitochondrialoutermembranechannel.Altersconformation(open/closed)in
anion-selectivechannelprotein2 responsetothemitochondrialmembranepotential.
SpliceIsoform2ofMicrotubule- 183 Promotesmicrotubuleassemblyandstability.
associatedproteintau
Synaptotagmin-1 161,163 Calciumsensorthattriggersneurotransmitterreleaseatthesynapse.Mayplayarole
insynapticvesicletrafficking.
Tubulinalpha-1chain 161,167,173,174,176,187 Majorconstituentofmicrotubules.
Tubulinbeta-2chain 161,166,167,173,174,176 Majorconstituentofmicrotubules.
Ubiquitin-activatingenzymeE1 170,188 Activatesubiquitinandconjugatesittotargetedproteinsduringubiquitinylation.
Ubiquitincarboxyl-terminalhydrolase 161,176 Adeubiquitinatingenzyme.
isozymeL1
Vimentin 170,180,189–191 Anintermediatefilamentthatactsasascaffoldproteinforthenucleus,endoplasmic
reticulumandmitochondriaandthecytoskeleton.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
8
Fig.4 Majorpathwaysofproteinde-nitrosylation.Twomajorde-nitrosylationpathwaysreduces-nitrosocysteineincells:thethioredoxin
reductase(Trx)familyofredoxsensorsthatincludesGlutaredoxin(Grx),andtheindirectS-nitrosoglutathio

Chunk 27:
ndoplasmic
reticulumandmitochondriaandthecytoskeleton.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
8
Fig.4 Majorpathwaysofproteinde-nitrosylation.Twomajorde-nitrosylationpathwaysreduces-nitrosocysteineincells:thethioredoxin
reductase(Trx)familyofredoxsensorsthatincludesGlutaredoxin(Grx),andtheindirectS-nitrosoglutathionereductase(GSNOR)system.aTrx
removesthes-nitrosyl-group fromtheprotein-SNO(either throughTrx-mediatedtrans-nitrosylation orTrx-disulfide-bond formationwithin
the protein-SNO) and then b generates a disulfide bond, freeing HON or NO+H+. Alternatively, the GSNOR system c first requires that
glutathione (GSH) reactwith thes-nitrosocysteine of an S-nitrosylated protein, transferringthe nitrosyl-group to thethiol of the cysteinyl-
groupofGSHgeneratingGSNO.dNext,theenzymeS-nitrosoglutathionereductase(GSNOR)andco-enzymeNADHcatalyzestheconversion
ofGSNOtoanN-hydrosulfinamide(GSNOH)intermediateandsubsequentlytoglutathione-disulfide(protein-GSSG)andhydroxylamine(not
shown).eProtein-GSSGisthenreducedtoGSHthroughtheactivityofglutathionereductase(GR)andco-enzymeNADPH.fTheGrxmember
oftheTrxfamilyhastwomodesofSNOreduction.GrxcanformanoxidizedGrxintermediate(Grx-SNO)ononecysteineresiduefollowing
transferofthenitrosyl-groupfromprotein-SNO.ThiscaneitherbereducedthoughtheGSHpathwaydescribedabove(mono-thiolreaction)
or through the traditional Trx system (diol-thiol reaction) by producing a disulfide bond. g The now oxidized Grx is reduced by two GSH
moleculestorestorethecycle.ThisfigurewascreatedusingBiorender.
and (2) inhibiting iNOS in glial cells. Indeed, a number of other exhibit neuroprotective actions in PD models; reducing oxida-
NOXinhibitorsarebeingstudiedfortheirtherapeuticpotentialin tive/nitrosative stress, aSyn aggregation or nitration, and activat-
PD134. ing anti-apoptotic pathways142–150. While early findings from
There has been some interest in repurposing the drugs clinical 

Chunk 28:
gBiorender.
and (2) inhibiting iNOS in glial cells. Indeed, a number of other exhibit neuroprotective actions in PD models; reducing oxida-
NOXinhibitorsarebeingstudiedfortheirtherapeuticpotentialin tive/nitrosative stress, aSyn aggregation or nitration, and activat-
PD134. ing anti-apoptotic pathways142–150. While early findings from
There has been some interest in repurposing the drugs clinical trials show that the protective effects of hydrogen and
simvastatin (i.e., Zocor) or dimethyl fumarate (i.e., Tecfidera) for deferiprone did not reach statistical significance151–153,
PD. These drugs are relevant as they function to activate NRF2 N-acetylcysteine (NAC) shows promising efficacy. NAC is a
whichupregulatesantioxidantresponseenzymestomitigateROS/ membrane-permeable form of cysteine, a precursor for glu-
RNS135,136. NRF2 is released from its repressor (KEAP1) allowing tathione.InvitrostudiesusingPFFstoinducesynucleinopathyin
NRF2 to translocate to the nucleus and transcribe >800 genes, primary neurons showed that treatment with NAC reduced aSyn
including phase i enzymes involved in the metabolic detoxifica- aggregatesandoxidativestress154.Likewise,manyanimalmodels
tion pathway and phase ii conjugation enzymes that metabolize ofPDshowthatoraladministrationofNACrescueddopaminergic
functionalgroups.ParticularlyimportanttotheregulationofRNS, neuron loss, reduced oxidative stress, and improved motor
NRF2activityupregulatesenzymessuchasthioredoxinandGCLC, outcomes154–157.Todate,clinicaltrialsinvestigatingtheeffective-
theratelimitingenzymeinglutathionesynthesis.Glutathionecan ness of NAC demonstrate that the oral coupled with intravenous
react with NO to form GSNO which acts as an NO reserve.
administration of NAC increases the expression of the dopamine
Glutathione also regulates GSNO(R) reductase (i.e., AHD5) which,
transporter and shows modest improvement in UPDRS scores in
together with thioredoxin, reduces protein S-nitrosothiol groups PDpatients158,159.Whilethes

Chunk 29:
 ness of NAC demonstrate that the oral coupled with intravenous
react with NO to form GSNO which acts as an NO reserve.
administration of NAC increases the expression of the dopamine
Glutathione also regulates GSNO(R) reductase (i.e., AHD5) which,
transporter and shows modest improvement in UPDRS scores in
together with thioredoxin, reduces protein S-nitrosothiol groups PDpatients158,159.WhiletheseresultssuggestNAC-treatmentmay
(Fig. 4). Studies suggest that both simvastatin and dimethyl
be one potential strategy for reducing RNS in PD, the limited
fumarate are neuroprotective in animal models of PD137–141.
bioavailabilityoforalNACinbraintissueandneedforintravenous
Indeed, dimethyl fumarate can rescue antioxidant enzyme
administrationmay limititswidespread use.
expressionaswellasincreaseneuriticarborizationandcomplexity
in hiPSC-derived dopamine neurons harboring the A53T aSyn
mutation128. While results from the Simvastatin clinical trial have Targetingalternative de-nitrosylating proteins
yettobereportedandtrialsusingdimethylfumaratehaveyetto Since the nitrosylation of proteins has deleterious effects with
commence, there is reason to be hopeful that a drug targeting immediate implications for PD, targeting this modification may
RNSmay be effective forPD therapy. offer therapeutic benefit. For example, S-nitrosylation of peroxir-
Additionalclinicaltrialshaveaimedtoimprovetheantioxidant eductase (Prx2) has been shown to impair the H O reductase
2 2
response in PD, including the study of lithium, hydrogen, capacity of Prx2,resulting in increasedoxidative stress. SNO-Prx2
Deferiprone and N-acetylcysteine. The aforementioned drugs has been found to be more abundant in PD models than
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
9
controls82. In light of this, preventing this and other SNO- 4. Grimm,A.&Eckert,A.Brainagingandneurodegeneration:fromamitochondrial
modifications might be an importa

Chunk 30:
eriprone and N-acetylcysteine. The aforementioned drugs has been found to be more abundant in PD models than
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
9
controls82. In light of this, preventing this and other SNO- 4. Grimm,A.&Eckert,A.Brainagingandneurodegeneration:fromamitochondrial
modifications might be an important step in mitigating PD pointofview.J.Neurochem.143,418–431(2017).
pathology. Sunico et al. identified that the overexpression of 5. Santos-Lobato,B.L.etal.Levodopa-induceddyskinesiasinParkinson'sdisease
sulfiredoxin (Srxn1), an enzyme responsible for the de- increasecerebrospinalfluidnitricoxidemetabolites'levels.J.Neural.Transm.
nitrosylation of SNO-Prx2, protected dopaminergic neurons from
(Vienna)129,55–63(2022).
6. Kouti,L.etal.NitricoxideandperoxynitriteserumlevelsinParkinson’sdisease:
theeffectsofparaquat/manebtreatmentinbothmiceandhiPSC-
correlation ofoxidative stress and the severity ofthe disease. Eur. Rev.Med.
deriveddopaminergic neurons120.
Pharmacol.Sci.17,964–970(2013).
Perhaps the most well-studied protein for its nitrosylated/de- 7. Gatto,E.M.etal.CirculatingplasmafactorsinParkinson’sdiseaseenhancenitric
nitrosylated function in PD is Parkin. The oxidation of Parkin oxidereleaseofnormalhumanneutrophils.J.Neurol.Sci.165,66–70(1999).
leadstoitsaggregationwhichreducesitsabilitytoactasaredox 8. Shukla, R., Rajani, M., Srivastava, N., Barthwal, M. K. & Dikshit, M. Nitrite and
sponge123. Recent reports indicate that the protein DJ-1 malondialdehyde content in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson’s
regulates SNO-parkin (and the S-nitrosylation of other proteins) disease.Int.J.Neurosci.116,1391–1402(2006).
via trans-nitrosylation78,121 as recently reviewed by Sircar and 9. Tuncel,D.,InancTolun,F.&Toru,I.Seruminsulin-likegrowthfactor-1andnitric
colleagues160. Moreover, inactivating DJ-1 mimics PD-related oxidelevelsinParkinson’sdisease.MediatorsInflamm.200

Chunk 31:
al fluid of patients with Parkinson’s
regulates SNO-parkin (and the S-nitrosylation of other proteins) disease.Int.J.Neurosci.116,1391–1402(2006).
via trans-nitrosylation78,121 as recently reviewed by Sircar and 9. Tuncel,D.,InancTolun,F.&Toru,I.Seruminsulin-likegrowthfactor-1andnitric
colleagues160. Moreover, inactivating DJ-1 mimics PD-related oxidelevelsinParkinson’sdisease.MediatorsInflamm.2009,132464(2009).
mitochondrial dysfunction78. Besides regulating SNO-Parkin, 10. Eve,D.J.etal.BasalganglianeuronalnitricoxidesynthasemRNAexpressionin
Parkinson’sdisease.Mol.BrainRes.63,62–71(1998).
SNO-Dj-1itself alsorepresentsa potentialPDtherapeutic target
11. Joniec,I.etal.Age-andsex-differencesinthenitricoxidesynthaseexpressionand
since DJ-1 plays a role in activating the antioxidant response, dopamineconcentrationinthemurinemodelofParkinson’sdiseaseinducedby1-
cellular metabolism, cell survival, and redox homeostasis160. methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine.BrainRes.1261,7–19(2009).
However,thespecificfunctionofSNO-Dj-1vs.de-nitrosylatedDj-
12. Watanabe, Y., Kato, H. & Araki, T. Protective action of neuronal nitric oxide
1 have yet to be elucidated. Future research that identifies synthase inhibitor in the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Metab.
supplementary de-nitrosylating proteins may provide valuable BrainDis.23,51–69(2008).
information for the removal of SNO-modification and rescuing 13. Cavalcanti-Kwiatkoski,R.,Raisman-Vozari,R.,Ginestet,L.&DelBel,E.Altered
PD pathology. expressionofneuronalnitricoxidesynthaseinweavermutantmice.BrainRes.
1326,40–50(2010).
In summary, the effects of RNS in PD are multifaceted. Herein,
14. Komeima,K.,Hayashi,Y.,Naito,Y.&Watanabe,Y.InhibitionofnNOSbycalcium/
wedescribethesourcesofRNSinneuronsandprovideevidence
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIα through Ser847 phosphorylation in
thatRNSisimplicatedinPD.Accumulatingevidencesuggestthat NG108-15neuronalcells.J.Biol.Chem.275,28139–28143(2000).
RNS exacerbates the rate 

Chunk 32:
n summary, the effects of RNS in PD are multifaceted. Herein,
14. Komeima,K.,Hayashi,Y.,Naito,Y.&Watanabe,Y.InhibitionofnNOSbycalcium/
wedescribethesourcesofRNSinneuronsandprovideevidence
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIα through Ser847 phosphorylation in
thatRNSisimplicatedinPD.Accumulatingevidencesuggestthat NG108-15neuronalcells.J.Biol.Chem.275,28139–28143(2000).
RNS exacerbates the rate of disease progression by promoting 15. Parlak, H. et al. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation induced by
aSyn misfolding and accelerating deposition of aSyn aggregates. docosahexaenoic acid protects dopaminergic neurons in an experimental
Thesheernumberofs-nitrosylatedproteinsthatdepositinLewy modelofParkinson’sdisease.FoliaHistochem.Cytobiol.56,27–37(2018).
BodyaggregatessuggeststhatRNS,oncetriggered,isaccelerating 16. Falsone, S. F., Kungl, A. J., Rek, A., Cappai, R. & Zangger, K. The molecular
notonlyaSynaggregationbuttheaggregationofmanyproteins chaperone Hsp90 modulates intermediate steps of amyloid assembly of the
critical to neuronal survival and function. This culminates in (1) Parkinson-related protein alpha-synuclein. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 31190–31199
(2009).
axo-dendritic pathology coupled to loss of synaptic function, (2)
17. Peng,H.M.etal.DynamiccyclingwithHsp90stabilizesneuronalnitricoxide
impaired mitochondrial dynamics coupled with altered energy
synthasethroughcalmodulin-dependentinhibitionofubiquitination.Biochem-
homeostasis,and(3)impaireddopaminemetabolism,allofwhich istry48,8483–8490(2009).
contributetofurtherRNSimbalance.Thus,reducingorcontrolling 18. Liu, J. et al. Rab11a and HSP90 regulate recycling of extracellular alpha-
RNSaccumulationearlyindiseaseetiologymayhavemultimodal synuclein.J.Neurosci.29,1480–1485(2009).
benefits to people with PD. This is supported by positive 19. Putcha, P. et al. Brain-permeable small-molecule inhibitors of Hsp90 prevent
outcomes in clinical trials for NAC showing rescue of dopamine alpha-synuclein oligomerfo

Chunk 33:
 Liu, J. et al. Rab11a and HSP90 regulate recycling of extracellular alpha-
RNSaccumulationearlyindiseaseetiologymayhavemultimodal synuclein.J.Neurosci.29,1480–1485(2009).
benefits to people with PD. This is supported by positive 19. Putcha, P. et al. Brain-permeable small-molecule inhibitors of Hsp90 prevent
outcomes in clinical trials for NAC showing rescue of dopamine alpha-synuclein oligomerformation andrescue alpha-synuclein-inducedtoxi-
levelsandimprovedfunctioninpatientcohorts.WhileNACuseis city.J.Pharm.Exp.Ther.332,849–857(2010).
limitedbyitspoorbioavailabilityinbraintissue,theseresultsmay 20. Titze-de-Almeida,R.etal.SuppressingnNOSenzymebysmall-interferingRNAs
protectsSH-SY5Ycellsandnigraldopaminergicneuronsfrom6-OHDAinjury.
indicate that de-nitrosylating proteins of the Trx family such as
Neurotox.Res.36,117–131(2019).
(Grx, Srxn1and Prx2) may represent a new class of disease
21. Lowenstein, C. J. & Padalko, E. iNOS (NOS2) at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 117,
modifying targets against PD. Future studies should explore 2865–2867(2004).
whether de-nitrosylating proteins are targetable and effective in 22. Hunot,S.etal.NitricoxidesynthaseandneuronalvulnerabilityinParkinson’s
diseased populations. disease.Neuroscience72,355–363(1996).
23. Broom,L.etal.NeuroprotectionbytheselectiveiNOSinhibitorGW274150ina
modelofParkinsondisease.FreeRadic.Biol.Med.50,633–640(2011).
DATAAVAILABILITY 24. Zhu,J.etal.Apelin-36mediatesneuroprotectiveeffectsbyregulatingoxidative
stress, autophagyand apoptosisin MPTP-inducedParkinson’sdisease model
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or
mice.BrainRes.1726,146493(2020).
analyzedduringthecurrentstudy. 25. Tapias,V.etal.Syntheticalpha-synucleinfibrilscausemitochondrialimpairment
and selective dopamine neurodegeneration in part via iNOS-mediated nitric
oxideproduction.CellMol.LifeSci.74,2851–2874(2017).
CODEAVAILABILITY
26. Dehmer, T., Lindenau, J., Haid, S., Dichgans, J. & Schulz, J. B. Deficiency of
Co

Chunk 34:
no datasets were generated or
mice.BrainRes.1726,146493(2020).
analyzedduringthecurrentstudy. 25. Tapias,V.etal.Syntheticalpha-synucleinfibrilscausemitochondrialimpairment
and selective dopamine neurodegeneration in part via iNOS-mediated nitric
oxideproduction.CellMol.LifeSci.74,2851–2874(2017).
CODEAVAILABILITY
26. Dehmer, T., Lindenau, J., Haid, S., Dichgans, J. & Schulz, J. B. Deficiency of
Code sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or induciblenitricoxidesynthaseprotectsagainstMPTPtoxicityinvivo.J.Neu-
analyzedduringthecurrentstudy. rochem.74,2213–2216(2000).
27. Jansson,E.A.etal.Amammalianfunctionalnitratereductasethatregulates
Received:14January 2022; Accepted: 26July2022; nitriteandnitricoxidehomeostasis.Nat.Chem.Biol.4,411–417(2008).
28. Kozlov,A.V.,Staniek,K.&Nohl,H.Nitritereductaseactivityisanovelfunctionof
mammalianmitochondria.FEBSLett.454,127–130(1999).
29. Presley,T.D.etal.Acuteeffectofahighnitratedietonbrainperfusioninolder
adults.NitricOxide24,34–42(2011).
30. Millar,J.Thenitricoxide/ascorbatecycle:howneuronesmaycontroltheirown
REFERENCES
oxygensupply.Med.Hypotheses45,21–26(1995).
1. Statistics,https://www.parkinson.org/Understanding-Parkinsons/Statistics(2022). 31. Pereira,C.,Ferreira,N.R.,Rocha,B.S.,Barbosa,R.M.&Laranjinha,J.Theredox
2. Pang,S.Y.Y.etal.Theinterplayofaging,geneticsandenvironmentalfactorsin interplaybetweennitriteandnitricoxide:Fromtheguttothebrain.RedoxBiol.
thepathogenesisofParkinson’sdisease.Transl.Neurodegener.8,1–11(2019). 1,276–284(2013).
3. Collier, T. J., Kanaan, N. M. & Kordower, J. H. Aging and Parkinson’s disease: 32. Nohl, H. et al. Mitochondria recycle nitrite back to the bioregulator nitric
differentsidesofthesamecoin?Mov.Disord.32,983–990(2017). monoxide.ActaBiochim.Pol.47,913–921(2000).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
10
33. Perez-Pardo,P.etal.Thegut-brainaxisinParkinson’sdisease:possibilities

Chunk 35:
rkinson’s disease: 32. Nohl, H. et al. Mitochondria recycle nitrite back to the bioregulator nitric
differentsidesofthesamecoin?Mov.Disord.32,983–990(2017). monoxide.ActaBiochim.Pol.47,913–921(2000).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
10
33. Perez-Pardo,P.etal.Thegut-brainaxisinParkinson’sdisease:possibilitiesfor 61. Stykel, M. G. et al. Nitration of microtubules blocks axonal mitochondrial
food-basedtherapies.Eur.J.Pharm.817,86–95(2017). transportinahumanpluripotentstemcellmodelofParkinson’sdisease.FASEB
34. Dodiya,H.B.etal.Chronicstress-inducedgutdysfunctionexacerbatesParkin- J.32,5350–5364(2018).
son’sdiseasephenotypeandpathologyinarotenone-inducedmousemodelof 62. Redondo,J.,Hares,K.,Wilkins,A.,Scolding,N.&Kemp,K.Reductionsinkinesin
Parkinson’sdisease.Neurobiol.Dis.135,104352(2020). expressionareassociatedwithnitricoxide-inducedaxonaldamage.J.Neurosci.
35. Kim,J.S.etal.alpha-SynucleininthecolonandpremotormarkersofParkinson Res.93,882–892(2015).
diseaseinneurologicallynormalsubjects.Neurol.Sci.38,171–179(2017). 63. Wang, Y. et al. Protein cysteine S-nitrosylation inhibits vesicular uptake of
36. Uemura,N.etal.Inoculationofalpha-synucleinpreformedfibrilsintothemouse neurotransmitters.Neuroscience311,374–381(2015).
gastrointestinaltractinducesLewybody-likeaggregatesinthebrainstemvia 64. Brown,G.C.&Cooper,C.E.Nanomolarconcentrationsofnitricoxidereversibly
thevagusnerve.Mol.Neurodegener.13,21(2018). inhibit synaptosomal respiration by competing with oxygen at cytochrome
37. Kim,S.etal.Transneuronalpropagationofpathologicalpha-synucleinfromthe oxidase.FEBSLett.356,295–298(1994).
guttothebrainmodelsParkinson’sdisease.Neuron103,627–641e627(2019). 65. Cassina, A. &Radi, R. Differentialinhibitory action ofnitric oxide and perox-
38. Sampson, T. R. et al. Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroin- ynitrite on mitochondrial electron transport. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 328,
flamma

Chunk 36:
nsneuronalpropagationofpathologicalpha-synucleinfromthe oxidase.FEBSLett.356,295–298(1994).
guttothebrainmodelsParkinson’sdisease.Neuron103,627–641e627(2019). 65. Cassina, A. &Radi, R. Differentialinhibitory action ofnitric oxide and perox-
38. Sampson, T. R. et al. Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroin- ynitrite on mitochondrial electron transport. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 328,
flammationinamodelofParkinson’sdisease.Cell167,1469–1480.e1412(2016). 309–316(1996).
39. Blandini,F.etal.Functionalandneurochemicalchangesofthegastrointestinal 66. Brown,G.C.Regulationofmitochondrialrespirationbynitricoxideinhibitionof
tract in a rodent model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 467, 203–207 cytochromecoxidase.Biochem.Biophys.Acta1504,46–57(2001).
(2009). 67. Chang,A.H.etal.RespiratorysubstratesregulateS-nitrosylationofmitochon-
40. Wang,L.etal.Miceoverexpressingwild-typehumanalpha-synucleindisplay drial proteins through a thiol-dependent pathway. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 27,
alterations in colonic myenteric ganglia and defecation. Neurogastroenterol. 794–804(2014).
Motil.24,e425–e436(2012). 68. Tonazzi,A.,Giangregorio,N.,Console,L.,DePalma,A.&Indiveri,C.Nitricoxide
41. Sun,M.F.etal.Neuroprotectiveeffectsoffecalmicrobiotatransplantationon inhibits the mitochondrial carnitine/acylcarnitine carrier through reversible
MPTP-induced Parkinson’s disease mice: Gut microbiota, glial reaction and S-nitrosylationofcysteine136.Biochim.Biophys.ActaBioenerg.1858,475–482
TLR4/TNF-alphasignalingpathway.BrainBehav.Immun.70,48–60(2018). (2017).
42. Moreno-Lopez,B.&Gonzalez-Forero,D.Nitricoxideandsynapticdynamicsin 69. Faienza,F.,Rizza,S.,Giglio,P.&Filomeni,G.TRAP1:ametabolichublinking
theadultbrain:physiopathologicalaspects.Rev.Neurosci.17,309–357(2006). agingpathophysiologytomitochondrialS-nitrosylation.Front.Physiol.11,340
43. Bradley,S.A.&Steinert,J.R.Nitricoxide-mediatedposttranslationalmodifica- (2020).
tions:impactsatthesynapse.Oxid.Med.CellLongev.2016,5681036(2016). 70. Hale

Chunk 37:
xideandsynapticdynamicsin 69. Faienza,F.,Rizza,S.,Giglio,P.&Filomeni,G.TRAP1:ametabolichublinking
theadultbrain:physiopathologicalaspects.Rev.Neurosci.17,309–357(2006). agingpathophysiologytomitochondrialS-nitrosylation.Front.Physiol.11,340
43. Bradley,S.A.&Steinert,J.R.Nitricoxide-mediatedposttranslationalmodifica- (2020).
tions:impactsatthesynapse.Oxid.Med.CellLongev.2016,5681036(2016). 70. Halestrap,A.P.Whatisthemitochondrialpermeabilitytransitionpore.J.Mol.
44. Nakamura, T. et al. Noncanonical transnitrosylation network contributes to CellCardiol.46,821–831(2009).
synapse loss in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 371, https://doi.org/10.1126/ 71. Cheng,Q.,Sedlic,F.,Pravdic,D.,Bosnjak,Z.J.&Kwok,W.M.Biphasiceffectof
science.aaw0843(2021). nitricoxideonthecardiacvoltage-dependentanionchannel.FEBSLett.585,
45. Amal,H.etal.Shank3mutationinamousemodelofautismleadstochangesin 328–334(2011).
theS-nitroso-proteomeandaffectskeyproteinsinvolvedinvesiclereleaseand 72. Aquilano,K.,Baldelli,S.&Ciriolo,M.R.Nuclearrecruitmentofneuronalnitric-
synapticfunction.Mol.Psychiatry25,1835–1848(2020). oxidesynthasebyalpha-syntrophiniscrucialfortheinductionofmitochondrial
46. Choi,Y.B.etal.MolecularbasisofNMDAreceptor-coupledionchannelmod- biogenesis.J.Biol.Chem.289,365–378(2014).
ulationbyS-nitrosylation.Nat.Neurosci.3,15–21(2000). 73. Shibuya,A.etal.NitrationofPPARyinhibitsligand-dependenttranslocationinto
47. Selvakumar,B.,Huganir,R.L.&Snyder,S.H.S-nitrosylationofstargazinreg- the nucleus in a macrophage-like cell line, RAW 264. FEBS Lett. 525, 43–47
ulatessurfaceexpressionofAMPA-glutamateneurotransmitterreceptors.Proc. (2002).
NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.106,16440–16445(2009). 74. Nakamura,T.&Lipton,S.A.S-nitrosylationofcriticalproteinthiolsmediates
48. Umanah, G. K. E. et al. AMPA receptor surface expression is regulated by protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative dis-
S-nitrosylation of thorase and transnitrosylation of NSF. Cell Rep. 33, 108329 ease.Antioxid.RedoxSi

Chunk 38:
nsmitterreceptors.Proc. (2002).
NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.106,16440–16445(2009). 74. Nakamura,T.&Lipton,S.A.S-nitrosylationofcriticalproteinthiolsmediates
48. Umanah, G. K. E. et al. AMPA receptor surface expression is regulated by protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative dis-
S-nitrosylation of thorase and transnitrosylation of NSF. Cell Rep. 33, 108329 ease.Antioxid.RedoxSignal.14,1479–1492(2011).
(2020). 75. Ge,P.,Dawson,V.L.&Dawson,T.M.PINK1andParkinmitochondrialquality
49. Petzold, G. C. et al. Nitric oxide modulates calcium entry through P/Q-type control:asourceofregionalvulnerabilityinParkinson’sdisease.Mol.Neurode-
calcium channelsand N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors in rat cortical neurons. gener.15,20(2020).
BrainRes.1063,9–14(2005). 76. Yao, D. et al. Nitrosative stress linked to sporadic Parkinson’s disease:
50. Tegenge,M.A.,Stern,M.&Bicker,G.Nitricoxideandcyclicnucleotidesignal S-nitrosylationofparkinregulatesitsE3ubiquitinligaseactivity.Proc.NatlAcad.
transductionmodulatessynapticvesicleturnoverinhumanmodelneurons.J. Sci.U.S.A.101,10810–10814(2004).
Neurochem.111,1434–1446(2009). 77. Chung,K.K.etal.S-NitrosylationofParkinregulatesubiquitinationandcom-
51. Lu,Y.F.,Kandel,E.R.&Hawkins,R.D.Nitricoxidesignalingcontributestolate- promisesParkin’sprotectivefunction.Science304,1328–1331(2004).
phase LTP and CREB phosphorylation in the hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 19, 78. Ozawa,K.etal.DJ-1isindispensablefortheS-nitrosylationofParkin,which
10250–10261(1999). maintainsfunctionofmitochondria.Sci.Rep.10,4377(2020).
52. Arancio,O.etal.Nitricoxideactsdirectlyinthepresynapticneurontoproduce 79. Oh, C. K. et al. S-Nitrosylation of PINK1 attenuates PINK1/Parkin-dependent
long-termpotentiationinculturedhippocampalneurons. Cell87,1025–1035 mitophagyinhiPSC-basedParkinson’sdiseasemodels.CellRep.21,2171–2182
(1996). (2017).
53. Kobayashi,Y.etal.BisphenolAandrotenoneinduceS-nitrosylationofprotein 80. Qu,Y.etal.ProhibitinS-nitrosylationisrequiredfortheneurop

Chunk 39:
lyinthepresynapticneurontoproduce 79. Oh, C. K. et al. S-Nitrosylation of PINK1 attenuates PINK1/Parkin-dependent
long-termpotentiationinculturedhippocampalneurons. Cell87,1025–1035 mitophagyinhiPSC-basedParkinson’sdiseasemodels.CellRep.21,2171–2182
(1996). (2017).
53. Kobayashi,Y.etal.BisphenolAandrotenoneinduceS-nitrosylationofprotein 80. Qu,Y.etal.ProhibitinS-nitrosylationisrequiredfortheneuroprotectiveeffect
disulfideisomerase(PDI)andinhibitneuriteoutgrowthofprimaryculturedcells ofnitricoxideinneuronalcultures.J.Neurosci.40,3142–3151(2020).
oftherathippocampusandPC12cells.J.Toxicol.Sci.45,783–794(2020). 81. Dutta,D.etal.Lowlevelsofprohibitininsubstantianigramakesdopaminergic
54. Stroissnigg,H.etal.S-nitrosylationofmicrotubule-associatedprotein1Bmed- neuronsvulnerableinParkinson’sdisease.Mol.Neurobiol.55,804–821(2018).
iatesnitric-oxide-inducedaxonretraction.Nat.CellBiol.9,1035–1045(2007). 82. Fang,J.,Nakamura,T.,Cho,D.H.,Gu,Z.&Lipton,S.A.S-nitrosylationofper-
55. Dawson,V.L.,Dawson,T.M.,London,E.D.,Bredt,D.S.&Snyder,S.H.Nitric oxiredoxin2promotesoxidativestress-inducedneuronalcelldeathinParkin-
oxidemediatedglutatmateneurotoxicityinprimarycorticalcultures.Proc.Natl son’sdisease.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.104,18742–18747(2007).
Acad.Sci.U.S.A.88,6368–6371(1991). 83. Kuhn,D.M.,Aretha,C.W.&Geddes,T.J.Peroxynitriteinactivationoftyrosine
56. Shi,Z.Q.etal.S-nitrosylatedSHP-2contributestoNMDAreceptor-mediated hydroxylase:mediationbysulfhydryloxidation,nottyrosinenitration.J.Neu-
excitotoxicity in acute ischemic stroke. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, rosci.19,10289–10294(1999).
3137–3142(2013). 84. Pong, K., doctrow, S. R. & Baudry, M. Prevention of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyr-
57. Ba,M.,Ding,W.,Guan,L.,Lv,Y.&Kong,M.S-nitrosylationofSrcbyNR2B-nNOS idinium-and6-hydroxydopamine-inducednitrationoftyrosinehydroxylaseand
signalcausesSrcactivationandNR2Btyrosinephosphorylationinlevodopa- neurotoxicity by EUK-134, a superoxide dismutase and catalase mimetic, in
induceddyskineticratmo

Chunk 40:

3137–3142(2013). 84. Pong, K., doctrow, S. R. & Baudry, M. Prevention of 1-methyl-4-phenylpyr-
57. Ba,M.,Ding,W.,Guan,L.,Lv,Y.&Kong,M.S-nitrosylationofSrcbyNR2B-nNOS idinium-and6-hydroxydopamine-inducednitrationoftyrosinehydroxylaseand
signalcausesSrcactivationandNR2Btyrosinephosphorylationinlevodopa- neurotoxicity by EUK-134, a superoxide dismutase and catalase mimetic, in
induceddyskineticratmodel.Hum.Exp.Toxicol.38,303–310(2019). cultureddopaminergicneurons.BrainRes.881,182–189(2000).
58. Giesen,J.etal.AMPAInducesNO-dependentcGMPsignalsinhippocampaland 85. Nappi,A.J.&Vass,E.Theeffectsofnitricoxideontheoxidationsofl-dopaand
corticalneuronsviaL-typevoltage-gatedcalciumchannels.Cereb.Cortex30, dopamine mediated by tyrosinase and peroxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 276,
2128–2143(2020). 11214–11222(2001).
59. Ryan, S. D. et al. Isogenic human iPSC Parkinson’s model shows nitrosative 86. Antunes,F.,Nunes,C.,Laranjinha,J.&Cadenas,E.Redoxinteractionsofnitric
stress-induced dysfunction in MEF2-PGC1alpha transcription. Cell 155, oxidewithdopamineanditsderivatives.Toxicology208,207–212(2005).
1351–1364(2013). 87. Nunes, C., Almeida, L. & Laranjinha, J. Synergistic inhibition of respiration in
60. Chung,C.Y.etal.Identificationandrescueofα-synucleintoxicityinparkinson brain mitochondria by nitric oxide and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC).
patient-derivedneurons.Science342,983–987(2013). ImplicationsforParkinson’sdisease.Neurochem.Int.47,173–182(2005).
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
11
88. Nunes,C.,Barbosa,R.M.,Almeida,L.&Laranjinha,J.NitricoxideandDOPAC- 116. Giasson,B.I.etal.Oxidativedamagelinkedtoneurodegenerationbyselective
inducedcelldeath:fromGSHdepletiontomitochondrialenergycrisis.Mol.Cell a-synucleinnitrationinsynucleinopathylesions.Science290,985–989(2000).
Neurosci.48,94–103(2011). 117. Przedborski,S.etal.Oxidativepost-translationalmodi®cationsofa-synucleinin
89. Hsu, M., Sriniva

Chunk 41:
.,Barbosa,R.M.,Almeida,L.&Laranjinha,J.NitricoxideandDOPAC- 116. Giasson,B.I.etal.Oxidativedamagelinkedtoneurodegenerationbyselective
inducedcelldeath:fromGSHdepletiontomitochondrialenergycrisis.Mol.Cell a-synucleinnitrationinsynucleinopathylesions.Science290,985–989(2000).
Neurosci.48,94–103(2011). 117. Przedborski,S.etal.Oxidativepost-translationalmodi®cationsofa-synucleinin
89. Hsu, M., Srinivas, B., Kumar, J., Subramanian, R. & Andersen, J. Glutathione the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse modelof Par-
depletionresultinginselectivemitochondrialcomplexIinhibitionindopami- kinson’sdisease.J.Neurochem.76,637–640(2001).
nergiccellsisviaanNO-mediatedpathwaynotinvolvingperoxynitrite:impli- 118. Mishizen-Eberz,A.J.etal.Cleavageofa-Synucleinbycalpain:potentialrolein
cationsforParkinson’sdisease.J.Neurochem.92,1091–1103(2005). degradationoffibrillizedandnitratedspeciesofa-Synuclein.Biochemistry44,
90. Chinta,S.J.&Andersen,J.K.ReversibleinhibitionofmitochondrialcomplexI 7818–7829(2005).
activity following chronic dopaminergic glutathione depletion in vitro: impli- 119. Yu,Z.etal.Nitratedalpha-synucleininducesthelossofdopaminergicneurons
cationsforParkinson’sdisease.FreeRadic.Biol.Med.41,1442–1448(2006). inthesubstantianigraofrats.PLoSOne5,e9956(2010).
91. Watanabe-Nakayama,T.etal.Self-andcross-seedingonalpha-SynucleinFibril 120. Sunico, C. R. et al. Role of sulfiredoxin as a peroxiredoxin-2 denitrosylase in
growthkineticsandstructureobservedbyhigh-speedatomicforcemicroscopy. human iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,
ACSNano14,9979–9989(2020). E7564–E7571(2016).
92. Leitao,A.D.G.etal.SelectivityofLewybodyproteininteractionsalongthe 121. Choi,M.S.etal.TransnitrosylationfromDJ-1toPTENattenuatesneuronalcell
aggregationpathwayofalpha-synuclein.Commun.Biol.4,1124(2021). deathinparkinson’sdiseasemodels.J.Neurosci.34,15123–15131(2014).
93. Danzer,K.M.,Krebs,S.K.,Wolff,M.,Birk,G.&Hengerer,B.Seedinginducedby 122. Gao,H.M.etal.

Chunk 42:
4,9979–9989(2020). E7564–E7571(2016).
92. Leitao,A.D.G.etal.SelectivityofLewybodyproteininteractionsalongthe 121. Choi,M.S.etal.TransnitrosylationfromDJ-1toPTENattenuatesneuronalcell
aggregationpathwayofalpha-synuclein.Commun.Biol.4,1124(2021). deathinparkinson’sdiseasemodels.J.Neurosci.34,15123–15131(2014).
93. Danzer,K.M.,Krebs,S.K.,Wolff,M.,Birk,G.&Hengerer,B.Seedinginducedby 122. Gao,H.M.etal.Neuroinflammationandoxidation/nitrationofalpha-synuclein
alpha-synucleinoligomersprovidesevidenceforspreadingofalpha-synuclein linkedtodopaminergicneurodegeneration.J.Neurosci.28,7687–7698(2008).
pathology.J.Neurochem.111,192–203(2009). 123. Tokarew,J.M.etal.Age-associatedinsolubilityofparkininhumanmidbrainis
94. Hansen, C.etal.a-Synuclein propagatesfrom mousebrain tografted dopa- linkedtoredoxbalanceandsequestrationofreactivedopaminemetabolites.
minergic neurons and seeds aggregation in cultured human cells. J. Clin. ActaNeuropathol.141,725–754(2021).
Investig.121,715–725(2011). 124. Imai, Y., Soda, M. & Takahashi, R. Parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-
95. Lee,H.J.etal.Assembly-dependentendocytosisandclearanceofextracellular inducedcelldeaththroughitsE3ubiquitin-proteinligaseactivity.J.Biol.Chem.
alpha-synuclein.Int.J.Biochem.CellBiol.40,1835–1849(2008). 275,35661–35664(2000).
96. Grudina,C.etal.HumanNPCscandegradealpha-synfibrilsandtransferthem 125. Shahmoradian, S.H. etal. Lewypathology in Parkinson’sdisease consists of
preferentially in a cell contact-dependent manner possibly through TNT-like crowdedorganellesandlipidmembranes.Nat.Neurosci.22,1099–1109(2019).
structures.Neurobiol.Dis.132,104609(2019). 126. Gomes,M.Z.,Raisman-Vozari,R.&DelBel,E.A.Anitricoxidesynthaseinhibitor
97. Mao, X. et al. Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission initiated by binding decreases6-hydroxydopamineeffectsontyrosinehydroxylaseandneuronalnitric
lymphocyte-activation gene 3. Science 353, https://doi.org/10.1126/ oxidesynthaseintheratnigrostriatalpathway.BrainRes.1203,160–169(2008)

Chunk 43:
s.Neurobiol.Dis.132,104609(2019). 126. Gomes,M.Z.,Raisman-Vozari,R.&DelBel,E.A.Anitricoxidesynthaseinhibitor
97. Mao, X. et al. Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission initiated by binding decreases6-hydroxydopamineeffectsontyrosinehydroxylaseandneuronalnitric
lymphocyte-activation gene 3. Science 353, https://doi.org/10.1126/ oxidesynthaseintheratnigrostriatalpathway.BrainRes.1203,160–169(2008).
science.aah3374(2016). 127. Yuste,J.E.etal.7-Nitroindazoledown-regulatesdopamine/DARPP-32signaling
98. Andreasen,M.,Lorenzen,N.&Otzen,D.Interactionsbetweenmisfoldedprotein inneostriatalneuronsinaratmodelofParkinson’sdisease.Neuropharmacology
oligomersandmembranes:acentraltopicinneurodegenerativediseases.Bio- 63,1258–1267(2012).
chim.Biophys.Acta1848,1897–1907(2015). 128. Czaniecki,C.etal.AxonalpathologyinhPSC-basedmodelsofParkinson’sdis-
99. Ganjam,G.K.etal.Mitochondrialdamagebyalpha-synucleincausescelldeath easeresultsfromlossofNrf2transcriptionalactivityattheMap1bgenelocus.
inhumandopaminergicneurons.CellDeathDis.10,865(2019). Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.116,14280–14289(2019).
100. Cuervo,A.M.,Stefanis,L.,Fredenburg,R.,Lansbury,P.T.&Sulzer,D.Impaired 129. Hoang,T.etal.NeuronalNOSandcyclooxygenase-2contributetoDNAdamage
degradationofmutanta-synucleinbychaperone-mediatedautophagy.Science inamousemodelofParkinsondisease.FreeRadic.Biol.Med.47,1049–1056
305,1292–1295(2004). (2009).
101. Winslow,A.R.etal.alpha-Synucleinimpairsmacroautophagy:implicationsfor 130. Schildknecht,S.etal.TheNOX1/4inhibitorGKT136901asselectiveanddirect
Parkinson’sdisease.J.CellBiol.190,1023–1037(2010). scavengerofperoxynitrite.Curr.Med.Chem.21,365–376(2014).
102. McKinnon,C.etal.Early-onsetimpairmentoftheubiquitin-proteasomesystem 131. Tomas-Camardiel,M.etal.Minocyclinereducesthelipopolysaccharide-induced
indopaminergicneurons causedbyalpha-synuclein. ActaNeuropathol.Com- inflammatoryreaction,peroxynitrite-mediatednitrationofproteins,disruption
mun.8,17(2020). of the blood-brain barrier, and damage in th

Chunk 44:
ofperoxynitrite.Curr.Med.Chem.21,365–376(2014).
102. McKinnon,C.etal.Early-onsetimpairmentoftheubiquitin-proteasomesystem 131. Tomas-Camardiel,M.etal.Minocyclinereducesthelipopolysaccharide-induced
indopaminergicneurons causedbyalpha-synuclein. ActaNeuropathol.Com- inflammatoryreaction,peroxynitrite-mediatednitrationofproteins,disruption
mun.8,17(2020). of the blood-brain barrier, and damage in the nigral dopaminergic system.
103. Choi, B. K. et al. Large alpha-synuclein oligomers inhibit neuronal SNARE- Neurobiol.Dis.16,190–201(2004).
mediatedvesicledocking.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.110,4087–4092(2013). 132. He,Y.,Appel,S.&Le,W.Minocyclineinhibitsmicroglialactivationandprotects
104. Braak,H.etal.StagingofbrainpathologyrelatedtosporadicParkinson’sdis- nigralcellsafter6-hydroxydopamineinjectionintomousestriatum.BrainRes.
ease.Neurobiol.Aging24,197–211(2003). 909,187–193(2001).
105. Burai,R.,Ait-Bouziad,N.,Chiki,A.&Lashuel,H.A.Elucidatingtheroleofsite-specific 133. Du,Y.etal.Minocyclinepreventsnigrostriataldopaminergicneurodegeneration
nitrationofalpha-synucleininthepathogenesisofParkinson’sdiseaseviaprotein in the MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98,
semisynthesisandmutagenesis.J.Am.Chem.Soc.137,5041–5052(2015). 14669–14674(2001).
106. Hodara,R.etal.Functionalconsequencesofalpha-synucleintyrosinenitration: 134. Barua, S., Kim, J. Y., Yenari, M. A. & Lee, J. E. The role of NOX inhibitors in
diminishedbindingtolipidvesiclesandincreasedfibrilformation.J.Biol.Chem. neurodegenerativediseases.IBRORep.7,59–69(2019).
279,47746–47753(2004). 135. Carroll, C. B. & Wyse, R. K. H. Simvastatin as a potential disease-modifying
107. Krishnan,S.etal.Oxidativedimerformationisthecriticalrate-limitingstepfor therapy for patients with Parkinson’s disease: rationale for clinical trial. Curr.
parkinson’sdiseasea-synucleinfibrillogenesis.Biochemistry42,829–837(2003). Prog.J.Parkinson'sDis.7,545–568(2017).
108. Danielson, S. R. et al. Preferentially increased nit

Chunk 45:
C. B. & Wyse, R. K. H. Simvastatin as a potential disease-modifying
107. Krishnan,S.etal.Oxidativedimerformationisthecriticalrate-limitingstepfor therapy for patients with Parkinson’s disease: rationale for clinical trial. Curr.
parkinson’sdiseasea-synucleinfibrillogenesis.Biochemistry42,829–837(2003). Prog.J.Parkinson'sDis.7,545–568(2017).
108. Danielson, S. R. et al. Preferentially increased nitration of alpha-synuclein at 136. Scuderi,S.A.,Ardizzone,A.,Paterniti,I.,Esposito,E.&Campolo,M.Antioxidant
tyrosine-39inacellularoxidativemodelofParkinson’sdisease.Anal.Chem.81, and anti-inflammatory effect of Nrf2 inducer dimethyl fumarate in neurode-
7823–7828(2009). generative diseases. Antioxidants 9, https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox9070630
109. Sevcsik, E., Trexler, A. J., Dunn, J. M. & Rhoades, E. Allostery in a disordered (2020).
protein: oxidative modifications to alpha-synuclein act distally to regulate 137. Tong, H. et al. Simvastatin inhibits activation of NADPH Oxidase/p38 MAPK
membranebinding.J.Am.Chem.Soc.133,7152–7158(2011). pathwayandenhancesexpressionofantioxidantproteininParkinsondisease
110. Musgrove,R.E.etal.Oxidativestressinvagalneuronspromotesparkinsonian models.Front.Mol.Neurosci.11,165(2018).
pathology and intercellular alpha-synuclein transfer. J. Clin. Investig. 129, 138. Ahuja,M.etal.DistinctNrf2signalingmechanismsoffumaricacidestersand
3738–3753(2019). their role in neuroprotection against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetra-
111. Paxinou, E. et al. Induction of alpha-synuclein aggregation by intracellular hydropyridine-induced experimental Parkinson’s-like disease. J. Neurosci. 36,
nitrativeinsult.J.Neurosci.21,8053–8061(2001). 6332–6351(2016).
112. Uversky, V. N. et al. Effects of nitration on the structure and aggregation of 139. Jing,X.etal.Dimethylfumarateattenuates6-OHDA-inducedneurotoxicityin
alpha-synuclein.BrainRes.Mol.BrainRes.134,84–102(2005). SH-SY5YcellsandinanimalmodelofParkinson’sdiseasebyenhancingNrf2
113. Norris,E.H.,Giasson,B.I.,Ischi

Chunk 46:
sease. J. Neurosci. 36,
nitrativeinsult.J.Neurosci.21,8053–8061(2001). 6332–6351(2016).
112. Uversky, V. N. et al. Effects of nitration on the structure and aggregation of 139. Jing,X.etal.Dimethylfumarateattenuates6-OHDA-inducedneurotoxicityin
alpha-synuclein.BrainRes.Mol.BrainRes.134,84–102(2005). SH-SY5YcellsandinanimalmodelofParkinson’sdiseasebyenhancingNrf2
113. Norris,E.H.,Giasson,B.I.,Ischiropoulos,H.&Lee,V.M.Effectsofoxidativeand activity.Neuroscience286,131–140(2015).
nitrative challenges on alpha-synuclein fibrillogenesis involve distinct 140. Campolo,M.etal.TheneuroprotectiveeffectofdimethylfumarateinanMPTP-
mechanismsofproteinmodifications.J.Biol.Chem.278,27230–27240(2003). mousemodelofParkinson’sdisease:involvementofreactiveoxygenspecies/
114. Yamin,G.,Uversky,V.N.&Fink,A.L.Nitrationinhibitsfibrillationofhumanα- nuclear factor-kappaB/nuclear transcription factor related to NF-E2. Antioxid.
synucleininvitrobyformationofsolubleoligomers.FEBSLett.542,147–152(2003). RedoxSignal.27,453–471(2017).
115. Vicente Miranda, H. et al. Posttranslational modifications of blood-derived 141. Lastres-Becker,I.etal.RepurposingtheNRF2activatordimethylfumarateas
alpha-synuclein as biochemical markers for Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Rep. 7, therapyagainstsynucleinopathyinParkinson’sdisease.Antioxid.RedoxSignal
13713(2017). 25,61–77(2016).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
12
142. Vallee,A.,Vallee,J.N.&Lecarpentier,Y.Parkinson’sdisease:potentialactionsof 167. Bizzozero,O. A.&Zheng, J. IdentificationofmajorS-nitrosylated proteinsin
lithium by targeting the WNT/beta-catenin pathway, oxidative stress, inflam- murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Neurosci. Res. 87,
mation and glutamatergic pathway. Cells 10, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 2881–2889(2009).
cells10020230(2021). 168. Zahid, S., Khan, R., Oellerich, M., Ahmed, N. & Asif, A. R. Differential
143. Lee,Y.S.,Feng,C.W.,Peng,M

Chunk 47:
ionofmajorS-nitrosylated proteinsin
lithium by targeting the WNT/beta-catenin pathway, oxidative stress, inflam- murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Neurosci. Res. 87,
mation and glutamatergic pathway. Cells 10, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 2881–2889(2009).
cells10020230(2021). 168. Zahid, S., Khan, R., Oellerich, M., Ahmed, N. & Asif, A. R. Differential
143. Lee,Y.S.,Feng,C.W.,Peng,M.Y.,Chan,T.F.&Chen,Y.C.Neuroprotective S-nitrosylation of proteins in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 256, 126–136
effects ofestradiolpluslithiumchlorideviaanti-apoptosisandneurogenesis (2014).
pathwayininvitroandinvivo.Parkinson’sDis.ModelsParkinson'sDis.2021, 169. Swomley,A.M.&Butterfield,D.A.OxidativestressinAlzheimerdiseaseand
3064892(2021). mild cognitive impairment: evidence from human data provided by redox
144. Zhao, Q. et al. Neuroprotective effects of lithium on a chronic MPTP mouse proteomics.Arch.Toxicol.89,1669–1680(2015).
modelofParkinson’sdiseaseviaregulationofalphasynucleinmethylation.Mol. 170. Mnatsakanyan,R.etal.Proteome-widedetectionofS-nitrosylationtargetsand
Med.Rep.19,4989–4997(2019). motifs using bioorthogonal cleavable-linker-based enrichment and switch
145. Liu,L.,Wang,J.&Wang,H.Hydrogensulfidealleviatesoxidativestressinjury technique.Nat.Commun.10,2195(2019).
andreducesapoptosisinducedbyMPP(+)inParkinson’sdiseasecellmodel. 171. Kuncewicz,T.,Sheta,E.A.,Goldknopf,I.L.&Kone,B.C.Proteomicanalysisof
Mol.CellBiochem.472,231–240(2020). S-nitrosylatedproteinsinmesangialcells.Mol.CellProteom.2,156–163(2003).
146. Zhang,Z.etal.Hydrogen-saturatedsalinemediatedneuroprotectionthrough 172. Sun,J.,Morgan,M.,Shen,R.F.,Steenbergen,C.&Murphy,E.Preconditioning
autophagy via PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in early and medium stages of results in S-nitrosylation of proteins involved in regulation of mitochondrial
rotenone-inducedParkinson’sdiseaserats.BrainRes.Bull.172,1–13(2021). energeticsandcalciumtransport.Circ.Res.101,1155–1163(2007).
147. Molina-Holgado,F.,Gaeta,A.,Fran

Chunk 48:
protectionthrough 172. Sun,J.,Morgan,M.,Shen,R.F.,Steenbergen,C.&Murphy,E.Preconditioning
autophagy via PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in early and medium stages of results in S-nitrosylation of proteins involved in regulation of mitochondrial
rotenone-inducedParkinson’sdiseaserats.BrainRes.Bull.172,1–13(2021). energeticsandcalciumtransport.Circ.Res.101,1155–1163(2007).
147. Molina-Holgado,F.,Gaeta,A.,Francis,P.T.,Williams,R.J.&Hider,R.C.Neuro- 173. Landino,L.M.,Koumas,M.T.,Mason,C.E.&Alston,J.A.Modificationoftubulin
protective actions of deferiprone in cultured cortical neurones and SHSY-5Y cysteines by nitric oxide and nitroxyl donors alters tubulin polymerization
cells.J.Neurochem.105,2466–2476(2008). activity.Chem.Res.Toxicol.20,1693–1700(2007).
148. Carboni,E.etal.Deferipronerescuesbehavioraldeficitsinducedbymildiron 174. Kamnev, A., Muhar, M., Preinreich, M., Ammer, H. & Propst, F. Difficulties in
exposureinamousemodelofalpha-synucleinaggregation.Neuromol.Med.19, generatingspecificantibodiesforimmunohistochemicaldetectionofnitrosy-
309–321(2017). latedtubulins.PLoSOne8,e68168(2013).
149. Hou,X.etal.GYY4137,anH2Sslow-releasingdonor,preventsnitrativestress 175. Wang,G.,Moniri,N.H.,Ozawa,K.,Stamler,J.S.&Daaka,Y.Nitricoxideregulates
andalpha-synucleinnitrationinanMPTPmousemodelofParkinson’sdisease. endocytosis by S-nitrosylation of dynamin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
Front.Pharm.8,741(2017). 1295–1300(2006).
150. Yuan,Y.Q.etal.ImpairedCBS-H2SsignalingaxiscontributestoMPTP-induced 176. Seneviratne,U.etal.S-nitrosationofproteinsrelevanttoAlzheimer’sdisease
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain Behav. during early stages of neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,
Immun.67,77–90(2018). 4152–4157(2016).
151. Martin-Bastida,A.etal.Brainironchelationbydeferiproneinaphase2ran- 177. MolinayVedia,L.etal.Nitricoxide-inducedS-nitrosylationofglyceraldehyde-3-
domiseddouble-blindedplacebocontrolledclinicaltrialinParkinson’sdisease. phosphat

Chunk 49:
n a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain Behav. during early stages of neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,
Immun.67,77–90(2018). 4152–4157(2016).
151. Martin-Bastida,A.etal.Brainironchelationbydeferiproneinaphase2ran- 177. MolinayVedia,L.etal.Nitricoxide-inducedS-nitrosylationofglyceraldehyde-3-
domiseddouble-blindedplacebocontrolledclinicaltrialinParkinson’sdisease. phosphatedehydrogenaseinhibitsenzymaticactivityandincreasesendogen-
Sci.Rep.7,1398(2017). ousADP-ribosylation.J.Biol.Chem.267,24929–24932(1992).
152. Yoritaka,A.,Kobayashi,Y.,Hayashi,T.,Saiki,S.&Hattori,N.Randomizeddouble- 178. Hara,M.R.etal.S-nitrosylatedGAPDHinitiatesapoptoticcelldeathbynuclear
blindplacebo-controlledtrialofhydrogeninhalationforParkinson’sdisease:a translocationfollowingSiah1binding.Nat.CellBiol.7,665–674(2005).
pilotstudy.Neurol.Sci.42,4767–4770(2021). 179. Qiu, C. et al. First nitrosoproteomic profiling deciphers the cysteine
153. Yoritaka,A.etal.Randomized,double-blind,multicentertrialofhydrogenwater S-nitrosylationinvolvedinmultiplemetabolicpathwaysoftealeaves.Sci.Rep.9,
forParkinson’sdisease.Mov.Disord.33,1505–1507(2018). 17525(2019).
154. Ghosh,S.etal.alpha-synucleinaggregatesinducec-Ablactivationanddopa- 180. Martinez-Ruiz,A.etal.S-nitrosylationofHsp90promotestheinhibitionofits
minergicneuronallossbyafeed-forwardredoxstressmechanism.Prog.Neu- ATPase and endothelial nitric oxide synthase regulatory activities. Proc. Natl
robiol.202,102070(2021). Acad.Sci.U.S.A.102,8525–8530(2005).
155. Berman,A.E.etal.N-acetylcysteinepreventslossofdopaminergicneuronsin 181. Chouchani,E.T.etal.IdentificationofS-nitrosatedmitochondrialproteinsby
theEAAC1-/-mouse.Ann.Neurol.69,509–520(2011). S-nitrosothioldifferenceingelelectrophoresis(SNO-DIGE):implicationsforthe
156. Munoz, A. M., Rey, P., Soto-Otero, R., Guerra, M. J. & Labandeira-Garcia, J. L. regulationofmitochondrialfunctionbyreversibleS-nitrosation.Biochem.J.430,
Systemic administration of N-acetylcysteine protects dopa

Chunk 50:
ni,E.T.etal.IdentificationofS-nitrosatedmitochondrialproteinsby
theEAAC1-/-mouse.Ann.Neurol.69,509–520(2011). S-nitrosothioldifferenceingelelectrophoresis(SNO-DIGE):implicationsforthe
156. Munoz, A. M., Rey, P., Soto-Otero, R., Guerra, M. J. & Labandeira-Garcia, J. L. regulationofmitochondrialfunctionbyreversibleS-nitrosation.Biochem.J.430,
Systemic administration of N-acetylcysteine protects dopaminergic neurons 49–59(2010).
against6-hydroxydopamine-induceddegeneration.J.Neurosci.Res.76,551–562 182. Yonashiro,R.etal.MitochondrialubiquitinligaseMITOLblocksS-nitrosylated
(2004). MAP1B-light chain 1-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal cell
157. Clark,J.etal.OralN-acetyl-cysteineattenuateslossofdopaminergicterminalsin death.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.109,2382–2387(2012).
alpha-synucleinoverexpressingmice.PLoSOne5,e12333(2010). 183. Bellucci,A.etal.AbnormalprocessingoftauinthebrainofagedTgCRND8
158. Monti,D.A.etal.N-acetylcysteinemaysupportdopamineneuronsinParkin- mice.Neurobiol.Dis.27,328–338(2007).
son’s disease: preliminary clinical and cell line data. PLoS One 11, e0157602 184. Spurny,R.etal.Oxidationandnitrosylationofcysteinesproximaltotheinter-
(2016). mediatefilament(IF)-bindingsiteofplectin:effectsonstructureandvimentin
159. Monti,D.A.etal.N-acetylcysteineisassociatedwithdopaminergicimprove- bindingandinvolvementinIFcollapse.J.Biol.Chem.282,8175–8187(2007).
mentinParkinson’sdisease.Clin.Pharm.Ther.106,884–890(2019). 185. Grau, M. et al. RBC-NOS-dependent S-nitrosylation of cytoskeletal proteins
160. Sircar,E.,Rai,S.R.,Wilson,M.A.,Schlossmacher,M.G.&Sengupta,R.Neuro- improvesRBCdeformability.PLoSOne8,e56759(2013).
degeneration:impactofS-nitrosylatedParkin,DJ-1andPINK1onthepatho- 186. Wang, Z., Kim, J. I., Frilot, N. & Daaka, Y. Dynamin2 S-nitrosylation regulates
genesisofParkinson’sdisease.Arch.Biochem.Biophys.704,108869(2021). adenovirustype5infectionofepithelialcells.J.Gen.Virol.93,2109–2117(2012).
161. Hao,G.,Derakhshan,B.,Shi,L.,Campagne,F.&Gross,S.S

Chunk 51:
euro- improvesRBCdeformability.PLoSOne8,e56759(2013).
degeneration:impactofS-nitrosylatedParkin,DJ-1andPINK1onthepatho- 186. Wang, Z., Kim, J. I., Frilot, N. & Daaka, Y. Dynamin2 S-nitrosylation regulates
genesisofParkinson’sdisease.Arch.Biochem.Biophys.704,108869(2021). adenovirustype5infectionofepithelialcells.J.Gen.Virol.93,2109–2117(2012).
161. Hao,G.,Derakhshan,B.,Shi,L.,Campagne,F.&Gross,S.S.SNOSID,aproteomic 187. Forrester,M.T.etal.ProteomicanalysisofS-nitrosylationanddenitrosylationby
method for identification of cysteine S-nitrosylationsites in complex protein resin-assistedcapture.Nat.Biotechnol.27,557–559(2009).
mixtures.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.U.S.A.103,1012–1017(2006). 188. Amal,H.etal.S-nitrosylationofE3ubiquitin-proteinligaseRNF213altersnon-
162. Benhar,M.,Thompson,J. W.,Moseley,M.A.&Stamler,J. S.Identificationof canonicalWnt/Ca+2signalingintheP301Smousemodeloftauopathy.Transl.
S-nitrosylatedtargetsofthioredoxinusingaquantitativeproteomicapproach. Psychiatry9,44(2019).
Biochemistry49,6963–6969(2010). 189. Huang,B.,Liao,C.L.,Lin,Y.P.,Chen,S.C.&Wang,D.L.S-nitrosoproteomein
163. Zareba-Koziol,M.,Szwajda,A.,Dadlez,M.,Wyslouch-Cieszynska,A.&Lalowski, endothelialcellsrevealedbyamodifiedbiotinswitchapproachcoupledwith
M. Global analysis of S-nitrosylation sites in the wild type (APP) transgenic Western blot-based two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. J. Proteome Res. 8,
mouse brain-clues for synaptic pathology. Mol. Cell Proteom. 13, 2288–2305 4835–4843(2009).
(2014). 190. Huang, B., Chen, S. C. & Wang, D. L. Shear flow increases S-nitrosylation of
164. Thom,S.R.,Bhopale,V.M.,Mancini,D.J.&Milovanova,T.N.ActinS-nitrosylation proteinsinendothelialcells.Cardiovasc.Res.83,536–546(2009).
inhibits neutrophil beta2 integrin function. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 10822–10834 191. Chen,S.C.etal.Acutehypoxiaenhancesproteins’S-nitrosylationinendothelial
(2008). cells.Biochem.Biophys.Res.Commun.377,1274–1278(2008).
165. Lefievre,L.etal.HumanspermatozoacontainmultipletargetsforproteinS-

Chunk 52:
.M.,Mancini,D.J.&Milovanova,T.N.ActinS-nitrosylation proteinsinendothelialcells.Cardiovasc.Res.83,536–546(2009).
inhibits neutrophil beta2 integrin function. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 10822–10834 191. Chen,S.C.etal.Acutehypoxiaenhancesproteins’S-nitrosylationinendothelial
(2008). cells.Biochem.Biophys.Res.Commun.377,1274–1278(2008).
165. Lefievre,L.etal.HumanspermatozoacontainmultipletargetsforproteinS-
nitrosylation:analternativemechanismofthemodulationofspermfunctionby
nitricoxide?Proteomics7,3066–3084(2007).
166. Jaffrey, S.R., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Ferris, C.D.,Tempst,P.&Snyder,S.H. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
ProteinS-nitrosylation:aphysiologicalsignalforneuronalnitricoxide.Nat.Cell
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbytheCanadianInstitutesofHealth,Research(2014-
Biol.3,193–197(2001).
685 to S.D.R.), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada,
npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104 PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation

---PAGE BREAK---

M.G.StykelandS.D.Ryan
13
(RG060805 and CRDPJ: 490841-15 to S.D.R.), and the Vanier Program (to M.G.S.). Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
FigureswereassembledusingBiorender. inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
ThisreviewwaswrittenandeditedbybothM.G.S.andS.D.R.Figuresandtableswere
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
assembledandeditedbybothM.G.S.andS.D.R.
adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
COMPETINGINTERESTS Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterests.
indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
regulationorex

Chunk 53:
ource,providealinktotheCreative
COMPETINGINTERESTS Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterests.
indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoScottD.Ryan. creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints ©TheAuthor(s)2022,correctedpublication2022
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeParkinson’sFoundation npjParkinson’sDisease(2022) 104

---PAGE BREAK---



