Chunk 1:
ParkinsonismandRelatedDisorders82(2021)61–76
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Parkinsonism and Related Disorders
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/parkreldis
Review article
Parkinson’s disease and skin
Nicki Niemanna,*, Andrew Billnitzerb, Joseph Jankovicb
aMuhammad Ali Parkinson Center, Department of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA
bParkinson’s Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Parkinson’s disease is associated with a variety of dermatologic disorders and the study of skin may provide
Parkinson’s disease insights into pathophysiological mechanisms underlying this common neurodegenerative disorder. Skin disor-
Skin ders in patients with Parkinson’s disease can be divided into two major groups: 1) non-iatrogenic disorders,
Seborrheic dermatitis
including melanoma, seborrheic dermatitis, sweating disorders, bullous pemphigoid, and rosacea, and 2) iat-
Melanoma
rogenic disorders related either to systemic side effects of antiparkinsonian medications or to the delivery system
Bullous pemphigoid
of antiparkinsonian therapy, including primarily carbidopa/levodopa, rotigotine and other dopamine agonists,
Rosacea
Sweating amantadine, catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitors, subcutaneous apomorphine, levodopa/carbidopa intesti-
Levodopa nal gel, and deep brain stimulation. Recent advances in our understanding of the role of α-synuclein in peripheral
Apomorphine tissues, including the skin, and research based on induced pluripotent stem cells derived from skin fibroblasts
Nodules have made skin an important target for the study of Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis, drug discovery, novel stem
Livedo reticularis cell therapies, and diagnostics.
Levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel
Deep brain stimulation
Biopsy
Diagnosis
1. Introduction PD has been established. As these conditions can have implications on
the p

Chunk 2:
 induced pluripotent stem cells derived from skin fibroblasts
Nodules have made skin an important target for the study of Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis, drug discovery, novel stem
Livedo reticularis cell therapies, and diagnostics.
Levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel
Deep brain stimulation
Biopsy
Diagnosis
1. Introduction PD has been established. As these conditions can have implications on
the patient’s quality of life and prognosis, a high index of suspicion for
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most common type of parkinsonism PD in certain skin disorders and vice versa is therefore critically
and the second most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder important. Skin conditions may also be seen as a consequence of oral,
with a 1–2% lifetime risk [1,2]. It is chiefly characterized by motor parenteral, and surgical therapies for PD. Such skin manifestations may
symptoms (e.g. bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, and postural instability) be directly attributable to certain medications used in the treatment of
and non-motor symptoms (e.g. cognitive decline, depression, anxiety, PD, while in other cases complications related to drug delivery or
overactive bladder, constipation, sialorrhea, and skin disorders). therapeutic procedures may be the cause (e.g. transdermal patches,
Non-motor symptoms may precede the diagnosis of PD, sometimes by subcutaneous injection, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy for lev-
several years or decades, and can be associated with substantial odopa/carbidopa intestinal gel, and implantation of hardware in deep
morbidity [3]. brain stimulation [DBS]). α-synuclein (α-syn), which plays a central role
Skin disorders in PD are of particular interest for several reasons. in PD pathogenesis [11], has been demonstrated over the past few de-
Melanoma, seborrheic dermatitis (SD), sweating dysfunction, and cades to be present in multiple peripheral tissues, including skin [12,
bullous pemphigoid (BP) are overrepresented in PD [4–6]. Some skin 13]. 

Chunk 3:
BS]). α-synuclein (α-syn), which plays a central role
Skin disorders in PD are of particular interest for several reasons. in PD pathogenesis [11], has been demonstrated over the past few de-
Melanoma, seborrheic dermatitis (SD), sweating dysfunction, and cades to be present in multiple peripheral tissues, including skin [12,
bullous pemphigoid (BP) are overrepresented in PD [4–6]. Some skin 13]. This small protein (140 amino acids), involved in a variety of
disorders such as SD [7] and sweating dysfunction [8] may in part be cellular mechanisms, undergoes misfolding and aggregation in the brain
due to peripheral autonomic dysfunction and can predate onset of PD as well as in the skin [14], and may contribute to some non-motor
motor symptoms. Melanoma [9] and BP [10], which seem to have a symptoms [15]. In recent years, skin biopsy has emerged as a poten-
more complex relation to PD, often develop years after the diagnosis of tial biomarker and promising tool for diagnosis of α-synucleinopathies
* Corresponding author. Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center, Department of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, 240 W Thomas Rd, Suite 301, Phoenix, AZ,
85013, USA.
E-mail address: nicki.niemann@dignityhealth.org (N. Niemann).
URL: https://www.barrowneuro.org/get-to-know-barrow/centers-programs/muhammad-ali-parkinson-center/ (N. Niemann).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2020.11.017
Received 22 August 2020; Received in revised form 18 October 2020; Accepted 17 November 2020
Availableonline20November2020
1353-8020/©2020ElsevierLtd.Allrightsreserved.

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[16]. Furthermore, as discussed later, skin may even have therapeutic including those that arise from pre-existing moles (superficial spreading
implications as a source of stem cells [17,18]. melanoma), de novo (nodular melanoma), from precursor lentigo
In this article we aim to provide an updated review of skin disorde

Chunk 4:
t al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[16]. Furthermore, as discussed later, skin may even have therapeutic including those that arise from pre-existing moles (superficial spreading
implications as a source of stem cells [17,18]. melanoma), de novo (nodular melanoma), from precursor lentigo
In this article we aim to provide an updated review of skin disorders maligna (lentigo maligna melanoma), or present under nail beds or on
associated with PD and skin-related complications of anti-parkinsonian the palms or soles (acral lentiginous melanoma). The relationship be-
therapy (Tables 1 and 2). We also discuss the role of skin in pathogenic, tween melanoma and PD has been studied for a long time as several
diagnostic, and therapeutic considerations in PD. epidemiological studies have demonstrated increased risk of melanoma
in patients with PD although the risk of other cancers is lower than
2. Methods expected [19–25], even after correcting for confounders known to
reduce the risk of PD, such as smoking [26]. Mahajan and colleagues
We conducted a review of English-language publications indexed on recently conducted a single-center, nested case-control study and found
PubMed until June 2020 with the following search terms: Parkinson’s that cancer, especially skin cancer, was associated with delayed onset of
disease OR parkinsonism AND each of the following search terms (or PD, although the clinical progression was unaffected [27]. The odds
combinations thereof): skin, diagnosis, biopsy, sensory, autonomic, ratio (OR; 95% confidence interval [CI]) for development of melanoma
alpha synuclein, dermatitis, neuropathy, seborrhea, seborrheic derma- was higher after (2.43; 1.77–3.32) but not before (1.09; 0.78–1.54)
titis, sweat, hyperhidrosis, hypohidrosis, pemphigoid, rosacea, mela- diagnosis of PD in North American and European populations with no
noma, cancer, nodules, treatment, levodopa, dopamine agonist, sex differences noted, acc

Chunk 5:
al [CI]) for development of melanoma
alpha synuclein, dermatitis, neuropathy, seborrhea, seborrheic derma- was higher after (2.43; 1.77–3.32) but not before (1.09; 0.78–1.54)
titis, sweat, hyperhidrosis, hypohidrosis, pemphigoid, rosacea, mela- diagnosis of PD in North American and European populations with no
noma, cancer, nodules, treatment, levodopa, dopamine agonist, sex differences noted, according to a recent meta-analysis [28]. Simi-
ropinirole, rotigotine, pramipexole, apomorphine, anticholinergics, larly increased risk of melanoma after PD diagnosis was also recently
monoamine oxidase, selegiline, rasagiline, safinamide, catechol-O- noted in a large cohort of PD patients in Korea [24]. Conversely, a recent
methyltransferase, entacapone, tolcapone, opicapone, amantadine, study found that patients with PD had a 3.8-fold (95% CI, 2.1–6.8)
livedo reticularis, istradefylline, surgery, deep brain stimulation, DBS, higher risk of having pre-existing melanoma [25]. In the same study, a
Duopa, Duodopa, levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel, and LCIG. The co-diagnosis of PD seemed to confer a protective effect against death
primary focus was on articles relevant to clinical aspects of skin disor- from metastatic melanoma. A positive family history of melanoma has
ders in PD. The reference lists from the articles were also reviewed. also been shown to increase the risk of PD [29]. Not all studies support
the association between PD and melanoma as noted in the
3. Skin disorders in Parkinson’s disease meta-analyses; in a large study from Israel including more than 1.2
million members of a health organization followed from 2000 to 2015,
3.1. Melanoma there was no increased risk of melanoma after a diagnosis of PD, but the
study suggested a higher risk of basal cell carcinoma [30]. A higher risk
Melanomas are malignant, pigmented tumors that arise from mela- of non-melanoma skin cancers in PD versus controls [28] and in
nocytes typically in the skin (cutaneous melanoma) and o

Chunk 6:
rs of a health organization followed from 2000 to 2015,
3.1. Melanoma there was no increased risk of melanoma after a diagnosis of PD, but the
study suggested a higher risk of basal cell carcinoma [30]. A higher risk
Melanomas are malignant, pigmented tumors that arise from mela- of non-melanoma skin cancers in PD versus controls [28] and in
nocytes typically in the skin (cutaneous melanoma) and occasionally LRRK2-PD versus idiopathic PD [31] has also been suggested.
from non-dermal melanocytes (Fig. 1). Their diagnosis can be suspected The association between melanoma and PD has been studied and
based upon visual inspection as they are characterized by asymmetry, reviewed extensively, but the nature of the relationship is still not well
border irregularity, color variability, large diameter, and evolution over understood. Some studies have pointed to potential shared risk factors
time (the “ABCDE’s”). Several types of melanomas are recognized, (higher age, male sex, Caucasian race, red hair, fair skin, and history of
Table 1
Non-iatrogenic skin disorders in Parkinson’s disease.
Skin disorder Description Treatment/Recommendations
Melanoma Skin lesions with variable color, irregular shape, and flat or raised borders, sometimes arising Surgical therapies, adjuvant radiation therapy, immunotherapy,
from pre-existing moles or de novo. and targeted therapies.
Seborrheic Sharply demarcated erythematous lesions with scaling, itching, and burning in sebaceous Topical therapies:
dermatitis areas (eyebrows, nasolabial folds, ear, hairline, chest). Keratolytics, antifungals (e.g. ketoconazole shampoo), steroids,
and topical immune suppressants.
Systemic therapy:
Antifungals, metronidazole, and antimicrobial peptides.
Sweating Hyperhidrosis or hypohidrosis Hyperhidrosis associated with:
disorders -medication OFF state: increase or provide more continuous
dopaminergic therapy, DBS.
-dyskinesiasa: reduce or fractionate dopaminergic therapy, start
antidyskinetic therapy (amantadin

Chunk 7:
conazole shampoo), steroids,
and topical immune suppressants.
Systemic therapy:
Antifungals, metronidazole, and antimicrobial peptides.
Sweating Hyperhidrosis or hypohidrosis Hyperhidrosis associated with:
disorders -medication OFF state: increase or provide more continuous
dopaminergic therapy, DBS.
-dyskinesiasa: reduce or fractionate dopaminergic therapy, start
antidyskinetic therapy (amantadine).
-focal symptoms: intradermal botulinum toxin injections.
-STN DBSa: adjust stimulation parameters (dorsal to ventral
stimulation for STN).
Hypohidrosis:
Avoidance of excessive heat exposure due to reduced evaporative
cooling.
Bullous Pruritic erythema and tense subepidermal blisters in flexural aspect of limbs and abdomen. Localized, mild moderate disease:
pemphigoid (Some patients may never develop bullae.) Topical corticosteroids, oral doxycycline.
Severe forms:
Systemic corticosteroids with or without adjunctive immune
suppressing or modulating therapies.
Rosacea Fixed centrofacial erythema and phymatous changes, major features (flushing, papules and Topical therapies, devices and surgical interventions, and oral
pustules, telangiectasia, ocular manifestations) and secondary features (burning sensation, therapies targeted against individual disease characteristics.
stinging sensation, edema, dryness, other ocular manifestations).
Perioral Perioral skin irritation associated with sialorrhea Oral therapies (e.g. glycopyrrolate) or salivary gland injection with
dermatitis botulinum toxin.
Neuropathy Sensory disturbance, trophic changes Pain: alpha-2-delta ligands (e.g. gabapentin and pregabalin).
DBS =deep brain stimulation, STN =subthalamic nucleus.
a Iatrogenic complications.
62

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
Table 2
Iatrogenic complications of Parkinson’s disease therapy.
Therapy Potential complications Treatment/Recommendations
Levodopa-carbidopa Wound infection/erythema at stoma site Pre

Chunk 8:
in and pregabalin).
DBS =deep brain stimulation, STN =subthalamic nucleus.
a Iatrogenic complications.
62

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
Table 2
Iatrogenic complications of Parkinson’s disease therapy.
Therapy Potential complications Treatment/Recommendations
Levodopa-carbidopa Wound infection/erythema at stoma site Prevention:
intestinal gel Remove dressing before cleaning. Clean with soap and water (avoid alcohol or
iodine). Mobilize PEG-J 2-3 cm in and out of stoma once healed.
Treatment:
Systemic antibiotics, possible PEG-J removal.
Granulation tissue Treatment: Topical silver nitrate.
Stoma leakage Management: Avoid topical creams/ointments. Apply dressing to keep stoma dry.
Levodopa-carbidopa Subcutaneous nodules Prevention: Rotation of infusion sites. Other potential preventative strategy under
subcutaneous infusion investigation.
Amantadine Livedo reticularis (skin pallor surrounded by a reticular pattern Treatment: Resolution 2-4 weeks after drug withdrawal.
of venous dilation, skin ulceration in rare cases), lower limb
edema
Non-ergoline dopamine Lower limb edema Treatment: Resolution with drug discontinuation.
agonists
Rotigotine transdermal Localized skin reaction (erythema, edema and or pruritus) Prevention: Rotate application sites. Apply patch to clean and dry skin avoiding
patch ointments, lotions or powders prior to application. Clean area with soap and water
after patch removal.
Treatment: Topical steroids.
Apomorphine subcutanoues Skin nodules, infusion site erythema (pathology consistent Prevention: Rotation of infusion sites. Use Teflon® needles. Apply needle at steep
injection/infusion with panniculitis) delivery angle (45-90 degrees to the skin). Use lower concentration of apomorphine
Sublingual apomorphine solution.
Treatment: Massage, silicone dressing, ultrasound management.
Oropharyngeal erythema Treatment: Resolution with drug discontinuation.
Deep brain stimul

Chunk 9:
 consistent Prevention: Rotation of infusion sites. Use Teflon® needles. Apply needle at steep
injection/infusion with panniculitis) delivery angle (45-90 degrees to the skin). Use lower concentration of apomorphine
Sublingual apomorphine solution.
Treatment: Massage, silicone dressing, ultrasound management.
Oropharyngeal erythema Treatment: Resolution with drug discontinuation.
Deep brain stimulation Hardware infection Prevention: Use curved scalp incisions during placement. Avoid externalization of
hardware following surgery.
Treatment: Wound debridement, hardware removal, IV antibiotics.
Skin erosion Prevention: Use of smaller hardware with lower profile, recessing hardware into
drilled bone, using curved scalp incisions, implanting hardware under muscle fascia
when possible.
Treatment: Surgical revision, wound debridement, hardware removal or re-
implantation
PEG-J =percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy-jejunostomy
pesticide exposure), embryological origin of melanocytes and neurons who have a particularly high risk for developing melanoma such as
(both arise from the neural crest), metabolic pathways, genetics, and Caucasian individuals with frequent and intense sun exposure, the
changes in melanin synthesis which have been suggested to explain the greatest risk factor for melanoma.
connection [6,9,32–35]. The preponderance of evidence supporting an Levodopa, an intermediate in the biosynthetic pathway of both
important link between PD and melanoma has led some organizations to dopamine and melanin [37], is the mainstay of treatment of PD motor
recommend visiting a dermatologist at least once a year for a skin check symptoms and has been hypothesized to represent the link between PD
[36]. This recommendation may be especially relevant in PD patients and melanoma [38,39]. However, thorough studies have not substan-
tiated these concerns [40–42]. In a study by Fiala and colleagues, 54
patients were diagnosed with both PD and melanoma, of which 31%
developed melano

Chunk 10:
atologist at least once a year for a skin check symptoms and has been hypothesized to represent the link between PD
[36]. This recommendation may be especially relevant in PD patients and melanoma [38,39]. However, thorough studies have not substan-
tiated these concerns [40–42]. In a study by Fiala and colleagues, 54
patients were diagnosed with both PD and melanoma, of which 31%
developed melanoma prior to even starting levodopa [40]. Another 63%
took levodopa for an average (range) of 60 months (21 days-204
months) prior to diagnosis of melanoma, a duration that has been crit-
icized as far too short as the delay between exposure to a carcinogen and
development of melanoma is usually thought to be decades, not months
or years [43,44]. Furthermore, there are several reports of melanoma
patients who were safely treated with levodopa [40]. In a study based on
data from the DATATOP trial, an association between levodopa and
melanoma was also not found [41]. A large, Danish population-based
study similarly found no correlation between melanoma and the esti-
mated cumulative levodopa dose in PD [42]. Considering these findings,
there does not appear to be a compelling reason to withhold levodopa in
patients with melanoma or a history thereof.
As far as genetic associations are concerned, multiple genes have
been implicated in both PD and melanoma [9,33]. Inzelberg and col-
leagues cross-referenced somatic mutations in metastatic melanoma and
lung cancer (adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma) with 15
PARK genes using whole-exome sequencing [45]. Compared to lung
cancer, significantly more patients with melanoma carried at least one
(48%) or multiple (25%) PARK gene mutations, underscoring the ge-
netic association between melanoma and PD. Two other studies impli-
cated somatic Parkin mutations in melanoma predisposition and
progression [46,47]. Recently, Dube and colleagues leveraged summary
Fig. 1. Large nodular melanoma, partially amelanocytic. statistic dataset

Chunk 11:
ignificantly more patients with melanoma carried at least one
(48%) or multiple (25%) PARK gene mutations, underscoring the ge-
netic association between melanoma and PD. Two other studies impli-
cated somatic Parkin mutations in melanoma predisposition and
progression [46,47]. Recently, Dube and colleagues leveraged summary
Fig. 1. Large nodular melanoma, partially amelanocytic. statistic datasets from several large genome wide association studies to
63

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
demonstrate a significant genetic correlation, overlapping gene combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and novel targeted therapies
expression, and 7 potential gene mediators of the connection between [60].
PD and melanoma [48].
Systemic pigmentation may also explain part of the link between PD 3.2. Seborrheic dermatitis
and melanoma. Neuromelanin in the substantia nigra (SN) is chemically
similar to peripheral melanin and may serve neuroprotective effects by SD is an inflammatory skin condition of variable severity charac-
acting as a reservoir for dopamine metabolites, drugs, and toxins [49]. terized by sharply demarcated erythematous lesions with scaling, itch-
Neuromelanin is reduced in the brains of patients with PD, but it is ing, and burning in the sebaceous areas of scalp (70% of patients), face
unclear if this is secondary to neuronal loss in PD or whether neuro- (88%; eyebrows, nasolabial folds, and ears), and chest (27%) [61]
melanin depletion is an integral part of PD-related neuropathology and (Fig. 2). The pathophysiology of SD is not established, but three core
if PD may in part be caused by loss of the protective effect of neuro- requirements include sebaceous gland secretion of lipids, colonization
melanin [50]. There is some evidence, however, that neuromelanin may with Malassezia yeast that metabolize lipids and thereby generate free
be toxic as once released from the dying neuron it can ac

Chunk 12:
The pathophysiology of SD is not established, but three core
if PD may in part be caused by loss of the protective effect of neuro- requirements include sebaceous gland secretion of lipids, colonization
melanin [50]. There is some evidence, however, that neuromelanin may with Malassezia yeast that metabolize lipids and thereby generate free
be toxic as once released from the dying neuron it can activate resident fatty acids and hydrogen peroxide, and a susceptible immune system
microglia and help propagate neurodegeneration. In skin melanocytes, [7].
α-syn expression may reduce melanin synthesis by inhibiting ultraviolet SD was first reported in parkinsonism in 1927 in a study by Krestin
radiation-induced tyrosinase activation, increasing the risk of DNA involving mostly patients with post-encephalitic parkinsonism [62]. It
damage due to sun exposure [51]. Alterations in the gene for the mel- has subsequently been described in PD [63–74], drug-induced parkin-
anocortin 1 receptor (MC1R), which regulates skin pigmentation, hair sonism [75], corticobasal degeneration [76], stroke and other neuro-
color, and influences melanoma risk, has been implicated as a PD risk logical disorders [7,77,78].
factor [52]. Vitamin D deficiency is commonly found in both PD and Estimates of SD prevalence in PD range from 18.6% [63] to 59% [79]
melanoma and is associated with a more aggressive disease course [9]. compared to a point prevalence of 3.2% in the general population and
Cutaneous pigmentation is regulated by vitamin D through enhance- 4.4% in those older than 65 years [80]. Since SD is quite common, mere
ment of melanogenesis [53], and Vitamin D receptor subtypes may co-occurrence with a neurological disorder does not necessarily imply
modulate the risk of both PD and melanoma [54,55]. Transcranial so- causation. SD is more common in men with or without PD compared to
nography of the midbrain reveals an extended hyperechogenic area in women, likely due to higher androgen level

Chunk 13:
s quite common, mere
ment of melanogenesis [53], and Vitamin D receptor subtypes may co-occurrence with a neurological disorder does not necessarily imply
modulate the risk of both PD and melanoma [54,55]. Transcranial so- causation. SD is more common in men with or without PD compared to
nography of the midbrain reveals an extended hyperechogenic area in women, likely due to higher androgen levels (affecting sebaceous gland
the SN in more than 90% of PD patients [56]. Similar changes can be activity and lipid composition) in men [7].
seen in 42–63% of melanoma patients [57,58] and correlate with a There is no clear consensus on the possible explanation for the higher
higher incidence of prodromal symptoms of PD, in particular asym- prevalence of SD in PD [7,81,82]. It has been proposed that autonomic
metric motor slowing and apathy [58]. Lighter skin tone, a melanoma dysfunction lead to increased sebum production which coupled with
risk factor, is associated with a larger hyperechogenic area in the SN reduced spontaneous facial movements (“masked facies” or hypomimia)
compared to darker skin [59]. in turn lead to further buildup of sebum and increase the risk of SD [7].
Treatment of melanoma involves surgical excision of the tumor and Others have argued that reduced movements lead to changes in hygiene
surrounding healthy tissue and occasionally sentinel node biopsy in that promote Malassezia growth as well as reduce lymphatic flow pre-
localized disease, whereas metastatic melanoma is treated with a venting T-cell mediated control of Malassezia and may therefore better
explain the link between neurological diseases, including PD, and SD
[81]. A possible role of autonomic dysfunction in sebum excretion was
found in one study assessing forehead sympathetic skin responses [83],
but not in another report which did not assess skin autonomic function
directly, but evaluated for autonomic dysfunction based on adaptation
to tilting and cardiovascular tests [68]. Tanner an

Chunk 14:
plain the link between neurological diseases, including PD, and SD
[81]. A possible role of autonomic dysfunction in sebum excretion was
found in one study assessing forehead sympathetic skin responses [83],
but not in another report which did not assess skin autonomic function
directly, but evaluated for autonomic dysfunction based on adaptation
to tilting and cardiovascular tests [68]. Tanner and colleagues found
that PD risk seemed to be increased following a diagnosis of SD, sug-
gesting that SD may represent a premotor symptom due to autonomic
dysfunction [84]. Higher levels of melanocyte-stimulating hormone
(MSH), a “sebothrophic” hormone, has also been found in PD patients
[85]. Some studies indicate that PD patients, especially male, have
higher sebum excretion rates (SER) than healthy individuals [63,68,71],
although SER does not seem to correlate with the severity of parkin-
sonism [70].
Some [64,67,71,86], but not all [63,68,87], authors have reported
reduced sebum production after initiation of levodopa, however only if
the SER is elevated at baseline [71]. The potential beneficial effects of
levodopa may be secondary to blockade of MSH secretion and/or
improved mobility leading to increased clearance of sebum [82],
although the response is variable and does not appear to correlate with
dose or duration of therapy. Reduction of sebum production does
improve clinical characteristics of SD [86,88]. However, higher SER is
unlikely to be the main explanation for the correlation between PD and
SD; after all, in healthy individuals SER decrease with advancing age
[89] while the prevalence of SD increases [80] and SER is usually
normal in (non-PD) SD [90]. Interestingly, it has been found that SD
lesions in PD have a more than two-fold increase in yeast density and in
the proportion of Malassezia species with high lipase activity (globosa)
compared to SD lesions in non-PD patients, although the cause of this
finding is unclear [74]. Of 1408 patients with spinal

Chunk 15:
 while the prevalence of SD increases [80] and SER is usually
normal in (non-PD) SD [90]. Interestingly, it has been found that SD
lesions in PD have a more than two-fold increase in yeast density and in
the proportion of Malassezia species with high lipase activity (globosa)
compared to SD lesions in non-PD patients, although the cause of this
finding is unclear [74]. Of 1408 patients with spinal cord injury in a
Korean study, only 59 (4.2%) were subsequently diagnosed with SD
Fig. 2. Seborrheic dermatitis. [91], similar to the prevalence in the general population [80], arguing
64

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
against general immobility in PD and other neurological disorders as a stimulation of hypothalamic fibers [131–134].
significant contributor to SD pathogenesis. Therefore, the link between
PD and SD remains as uncertain as ever. 3.4. Bullous pemphigoid
Treatment of SD involves application of topical keratolytics, anti-
fungals (e.g. ketoconazole shampoo), and steroids, and occasionally BP is an autoimmune disorder characterized by a prodrome with
other topical immune suppressants (e.g. calcineurin inhibitors) and pruritus, erythema, and papular or urticarial cutaneous lesions followed
systemic therapies (antifungals, metronidazole, and antimicrobial pep- by a bullous stage with bullae and vesicles, typically present in the
tides) [91,92]. Intradermal injections of botulinum toxin have been flexural aspects of the limbs and abdomen [135]. The age at onset is
found to effectively decrease sebum production and excretion, possibly usually in the seventh or eighth decade of life. BP is strongly associated
via its blockade of cholinergic signaling, in patients with oily skin dis- with neurological disorders, including PD, Alzheimer’s disease, stroke,
orders such as acne and SD [93,94]. and multiple sclerosis, even after correcting for age [10,136]. Up to 20%
of BP cases do not progress 

Chunk 16:
ebum production and excretion, possibly usually in the seventh or eighth decade of life. BP is strongly associated
via its blockade of cholinergic signaling, in patients with oily skin dis- with neurological disorders, including PD, Alzheimer’s disease, stroke,
orders such as acne and SD [93,94]. and multiple sclerosis, even after correcting for age [10,136]. Up to 20%
of BP cases do not progress from the “prodromal phase” into the “bullous
3.3. Sweating disorders phase” and will therefore not develop any obvious skin blistering [137].
In one study, 50.3% of patients had at least one neurological disease
Abnormalities of sweating is a common non-motor symptom in PD prior to their BP diagnosis compared with 24.2% for controls [138]; a
and include increased (hyperhidrosis) or decreased (hypohidrosis) high index of suspicion is therefore required when evaluating a patient
sweating [8,63,95–109]. Many studies have focused exclusively on with a known neurological disorder and a new skin condition. Neuro-
excessive sweating, sometimes associated with “drenching sweats”, logical disorders precede BP by an average of 6.7 years [10]. Prevalence
especially during medication OFF periods [107,110]. Increased sweating estimates of BP in PD populations range from 2.3 to 17.9% in the many
seemed to be more common and was reported in 9–100% (average published retrospective studies [138–161]. In a systematic review, there
approximately 38%) of patients compared to decreased sweating in was a significant association between BP and PD with an OR (95% CI) of
9–46% (average approximately 15%) of patients in those studies that 3.06 (1.97–4.77) [10]. A meta-analysis using slightly less restrictive
reported the prevalence of both problems separately in PD populations criteria (some of the included studies lacked laboratory-supported
[96,100–103,106,109,111]. confirmation of the BP diagnosis) showed similar results [136]. BP it-
Abnormal sweating in PD may have a profound negative impact on

Chunk 17:
f patients in those studies that 3.06 (1.97–4.77) [10]. A meta-analysis using slightly less restrictive
reported the prevalence of both problems separately in PD populations criteria (some of the included studies lacked laboratory-supported
[96,100–103,106,109,111]. confirmation of the BP diagnosis) showed similar results [136]. BP it-
Abnormal sweating in PD may have a profound negative impact on self is associated with a significantly increased mortality rate, although
quality of life [95,111]. Increased sweating affects mainly the head, only two studies found an association between PD and increased mor-
neck, and trunk [104,111] and can be asymmetric [103,111]. Compared tality in BP [153,156].
to late-onset PD, young-onset PD is associated with higher rates of The pathogenic link between BP and neurological disorders,
sweating disorders [105,106]. Other correlates with increased sweating including PD, is not fully understood. BP is associated with autoanti-
include camptocormia [112] and freezing of gait [113]. bodies against two hemidesmosomal proteins: BPAg1 (BP230) and
In contrast to hyperhidrosis associated with PD, widespread reduc- BPAg2 (BP180) both of which include neuronal and non-neuronal iso-
tion of sweating (hypo- or anhidrosis) is a pattern more typical of mul- forms [10]. Neurodegeneration with associated disruption of the
tiple system atrophy (MSA) [103,114,115]. The presence of other blood-brain-barrier, such as occurs in PD [162], may expose immuno-
symptoms of dysautonomia, greater disease severity, and higher levo- logically protected neuronal BP antigens and lead to generation of au-
dopa dose also correlate with abnormal sweating [63,95,109]. Although toantibodies that cross-react with epidermal isoforms of the BP antigens
there is no consistent relationship between treatment of PD and sweat- [10].
ing, increased sweating is mostly seen in the medication OFF state likely Localized and mild-moderate BP is usually treated with topical cor-
due

Chunk 18:
gens and lead to generation of au-
dopa dose also correlate with abnormal sweating [63,95,109]. Although toantibodies that cross-react with epidermal isoforms of the BP antigens
there is no consistent relationship between treatment of PD and sweat- [10].
ing, increased sweating is mostly seen in the medication OFF state likely Localized and mild-moderate BP is usually treated with topical cor-
due to insufficient central dopaminergic stimulation or in the medica- ticosteroids or oral doxycycline, and severe forms is treated with sys-
tion ON state with dyskinesias, possibly due to excess energy expendi- temic corticosteroids alone or in combination with adjunctive immune
ture [105,107,111,116]. However, some groups have not found suppressing or modulating therapies [163].
convincing links between abnormal sweating and dyskinesia duration or
severity [111], nonmotor fluctuations, daily dose of levodopa, or other 3.5. Rosacea
PD medications [104,117]. Increased sweating was noted as one of the
most common nonmotor symptoms in the 2- to 10-year premotor period Rosacea is a common inflammatory skin disorder (prevalence of up
in the ONSET PD study [8]. to 10% or higher in Caucasians) characterized by the presence of a fixed
The pathophysiology of sweating disorders in PD is unclear, but centrofacial erythema and phymatous changes (skin thickening and
likely involves both central dysfunction, including of sympathetic neu- irregular surface nodularity) and/or a range of “major” (flushing, pap-
rons in the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, and pe- ules and pustules, telangiectasia, and ocular manifestations), and “sec-
ripheral autonomic denervation [118]. It has been suggested that ondary” (burning sensation, stinging sensation, edema, dryness, and
increased sweating in axial regions may in part be a compensatory ocular manifestations) features affecting primarily the convexities of the
mechanism due to reduced sympathetic function in distal extremities cen

Chunk 19:
 telangiectasia, and ocular manifestations), and “sec-
ripheral autonomic denervation [118]. It has been suggested that ondary” (burning sensation, stinging sensation, edema, dryness, and
increased sweating in axial regions may in part be a compensatory ocular manifestations) features affecting primarily the convexities of the
mechanism due to reduced sympathetic function in distal extremities central face [164]. Evidence for a link between rosacea and PD is so far
[104]. limited to 3 main studies [63,165,166]. In a cohort of patients with PD,
While there is no evidence-based recommendation for the manage- Fischer and colleagues in 2001 first noted a relatively high prevalence of
ment of sweating disorders in PD [119], increased sweating has been concomitant rosacea (18.8%) and flushing (31.9%), of which the latter
found to improve with increased dopaminergic therapy [120] and with in some cases could have represented flushing due to autonomic
more continuous drug delivery (reduction of OFF time), such as after dysfunction in PD and not rosacea per se [63]. In a nationwide study of
addition of a catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor to levodopa with a the Danish population (reference population >5 million individuals),
peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor [121], long-term subcutaneous Egeberg and colleagues found that a diagnosis of rosacea conferred an
apomorphine [122], and intrajejunal levodopa infusion [123]. Howev- almost 2-fold increased risk of new-onset PD after adjusting for multiple
er, if increased sweating occurs in the setting of dyskinesias, medication covariates [165]. A diagnosis of rosacea was associated with 2.4 year
reduction may be helpful [111]. earlier onset of PD (p <0.001) and use of tetracycline seemed to reduce
Focal increased sweating can be treated effectively with intradermal the risk of PD. No significant sex differences were noted. In a subsequent
botulinum toxin injections [124]. Subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS is US study, Mathieu and c

Chunk 20:
es [165]. A diagnosis of rosacea was associated with 2.4 year
reduction may be helpful [111]. earlier onset of PD (p <0.001) and use of tetracycline seemed to reduce
Focal increased sweating can be treated effectively with intradermal the risk of PD. No significant sex differences were noted. In a subsequent
botulinum toxin injections [124]. Subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS is US study, Mathieu and colleagues [166] replicated the findings from the
associated with improvement of abnormal sweating in several reports Danish study.
[100,125–129], although a few authors have found no change [130] or Theories based on matrix metalloproteinases and the microbiome-
even stimulation-induced increase of sweating, perhaps secondary to gut-brain axis have been offered as possible explanations for the
65

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
connection between rosacea and PD, although the pathophysiological care of their PEG-J. Best practice guidelines include avoiding in and out
basis for the connection is still unknown [165]. Peripheral sensory movement of the PEG-J in the first 72–96 h after placement [186]. In the
neuropathy and immune dysregulation in PD has also been offered as a first 2 weeks after placement care should include removing the stoma
possible explanation [167]. Even so, further studies are clearly needed site dressing before clearing, cleaning with only mild soap and water,
to firmly confirm the association between PD and rosacea. Rosacea is and avoiding alcohol or iodine containing products. Once the stoma has
treated with a range of topical and systemic (non-immunosuppressive) healed the PEG-J tube should be mobilized 2–3 cm in and out of the
therapies and device/surgery-based therapies [168]. stoma to prevent the PEG-J bumper from becoming embedded. Patients
should avoid rotating the tubing and make sure that they dry the stoma
3.6. Perioral dermatitis area after activities such as shower

Chunk 21:
he stoma has
treated with a range of topical and systemic (non-immunosuppressive) healed the PEG-J tube should be mobilized 2–3 cm in and out of the
therapies and device/surgery-based therapies [168]. stoma to prevent the PEG-J bumper from becoming embedded. Patients
should avoid rotating the tubing and make sure that they dry the stoma
3.6. Perioral dermatitis area after activities such as showering or swimming.
Stoma infections typically occur within 3 weeks following place-
Sialorrhea is caused by pooling of saliva in the mouth and pharynx ment. They should be treated with systemic antibiotics as topical anti-
due to less frequent swallowing and hypomimia leading to involuntary biotics are generally not helpful. If there is no response to treatment the
leakage of saliva through the corner of the mouth causing perioral skin PEG-J may need to be removed. Granulation tissue can be treated top-
irritation. The prevalence of sialorrhea in PD was 40% in a recent study ically with silver nitrate. For stoma leakage no treatment or manage-
and was significantly associated with reduced quality of life [169]. ment is indicated. Patients should be cautioned against over treating
Perioral dermatitis can develop as a consequence of uncontrolled sia- their stoma site with tropical creams and ointments. Best practices
lorrhea and may be debilitating in severe cases [170]. Sialorrhea can be include keeping the stoma dry and applying a dressing during the day
treated by reducing saliva production with oral anticholinergics such as which absorbs seepage and limits any rubbing or skin irritation.
sublingual atropine sulfate or glycopyrrolate [171], injection of botuli-
num toxin, particularly rimabotulinumtoxinB [172], into salivary 4.1.2. Levodopa-carbidopa subcutaneous infusion
glands, or improvement of swallowing [173]. Early clinical trials have assessed the safety and efficacy of a
carbidopa-levodopa prodrug delivered subcutaneously through a pump
4. Therapy-related skin disord

Chunk 22:
ation.
sublingual atropine sulfate or glycopyrrolate [171], injection of botuli-
num toxin, particularly rimabotulinumtoxinB [172], into salivary 4.1.2. Levodopa-carbidopa subcutaneous infusion
glands, or improvement of swallowing [173]. Early clinical trials have assessed the safety and efficacy of a
carbidopa-levodopa prodrug delivered subcutaneously through a pump
4. Therapy-related skin disorders (ABBV-951 and ND0612). In a study of 33 healthy volunteers who
received both ABBV-951 and saline continuously for 10 days via sub-
4.1. Levodopa cutaneous infusion at two separate sites, the most common skin events
were erythema (43%), skin “reactions” (20%), and infusion site pain
Carbidopa-levodopa therapy is the first line therapy for motor (14%) [187]. In a phase 1 study of 13 PD subjects treated with subcu-
symptoms related to PD [174]. Use of the medication rarely leads to any taneous ABBV-951, steady state levodopa concentration was associated
skin-related manifestations and is otherwise generally well tolerated. with stable levodopa exposure and minimal fluctuation [188]. Adverse
Lower extremity edema has been noted in 1–2% of patients across events included pain at the infusion site in 2 patients. In a follow up
clinical trials [175]. There are also reports of an allergic reaction to phase 1b study, 21 PD patients with >10 years of motor symptoms
levodopa therapy manifesting as a generalized pruritic maculopapular received 28 days of continuous subcutaneous infusion of ABBV-951
rash that subsequently resolves with discontinuation of levodopa [189]. Of these patients, one patient developed a subcutaneous ab-
treatment, however, it is thought that this reaction is more likely scess and cellulitis. Another patient reported an infusion site infection
attributed to yellow dye sometimes used in the medication, particularly that led to premature discontinuation.
the Sinemet 25/100 formulation, rather than levodopa [175–178]. As In an open label crossover study compari

Chunk 23:
ne patient developed a subcutaneous ab-
treatment, however, it is thought that this reaction is more likely scess and cellulitis. Another patient reported an infusion site infection
attributed to yellow dye sometimes used in the medication, particularly that led to premature discontinuation.
the Sinemet 25/100 formulation, rather than levodopa [175–178]. As In an open label crossover study comparing ND0612 to Levodopa/
stated previously, there is no credible connection between levodopa use Carbidopa Intestinal Gel (LCIG) in healthy volunteers, ND0612 was
and development of melanoma. shown to have similar bioequivalence of LCIG [190]. In a phase IIb open
label study of ND0612 in 214 PD patients, ND0612 was noted to cause
4.1.1. Levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel manageable skin reactions, skin nodules, infusion site hematoma, and
Levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG) is a carboxymethylcellu- infusion site pain. Such adverse events led to discontinuation of ND0612
lose gel delivered directly into the small intestine via a percutaneous in less than a quarter of patients [191]. In a phase 2 study of 38 PD
endoscopic gastrostojejunostomy (PEG-J) [179]. Medication is deliv- patients, 24-hour ND0612 infusion was associated with significant
ered at a constant rate by using a portable infusion system and by improvement in measures of daily living following 28 days of treatment
bypassing gastric emptying which results in more steady plasma levo- [192]. Patients reported reduction in Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating
dopa levels that helps reduce motor fluctuations seen with oral levodopa Scale Activities of Daily Living least squares (LS) mean (95% CI) scores
therapy. Skin-related complications related to LCIG are primarily due to of 2.9 points ((cid:0) 5.4-((cid:0) 0.5), p =0.02), and a reduction of Parkinson’s
complications surrounding the PEG-J placement or ongoing mainte- Disease Questionnaire 39 scores of 7.51 ((cid:0) 12.93-((cid:0) 2.08), p =0.008).
nance. In a revi

Chunk 24:
evodopa Scale Activities of Daily Living least squares (LS) mean (95% CI) scores
therapy. Skin-related complications related to LCIG are primarily due to of 2.9 points ((cid:0) 5.4-((cid:0) 0.5), p =0.02), and a reduction of Parkinson’s
complications surrounding the PEG-J placement or ongoing mainte- Disease Questionnaire 39 scores of 7.51 ((cid:0) 12.93-((cid:0) 2.08), p =0.008).
nance. In a review of five clinical trials encompassing a total of 198 Two phase 3 clinical trials for subcutaneous infusion of carbidopa-
patients comparing LCIG to oral medication in advanced PD in which all levodopa prodrug, ABBV-951 (AbbVie, NCT03781167) and ND0612
patients underwent PEG-J procedure, 12.9% of all patients suffered a (Neuroderm, NCT04006210), are currently underway [193]. Given
wound infection after PEG placement [180]. Wound infection rates were promising early studies, subcutaneous carbidopa/levodopa infusion is a
higher in the control group (17.9%) than the treatment group (8.3%) viable treatment option for patients with PD and levodopa-related motor
suggesting that complications were due to the apparatus for delivery fluctuations and dyskinesia [2], but as with other subcutaneous treat-
rather than the medication. Other complications are well documented in ment options available for PD, adverse dermatologic events, such as
a review of 7 clinical trials involving 395 patients [181]. Within this subcutaneous nodules (Fig. 3), may influence tolerability. Potential
cohort, 18% of patients developed excessive granulation tissue, 16% preventive strategies, using better and safer delivery techniques, are
developed erythema around the incision site, and 20% developed a currently being investigated.
non-serious post-operative wound infection. Serious complications
included peritonitis in 1.8% of patients and a major post procedural 4.2. Amantadine
infection in 0.8% of patients. Similar complication rates have been re-
ported in other studies which have additionally reported 

Chunk 25:
delivery techniques, are
developed erythema around the incision site, and 20% developed a currently being investigated.
non-serious post-operative wound infection. Serious complications
included peritonitis in 1.8% of patients and a major post procedural 4.2. Amantadine
infection in 0.8% of patients. Similar complication rates have been re-
ported in other studies which have additionally reported stoma leakage Amantadine is often used in PD for the management of levodopa-
and subcutaneous abscess formation as potential complications induced dyskinesia. It exerts its effects through several mechanisms
[182–185]. Adverse events related to PEG-J placement for LCIG are including competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antago-
comparable to those reported in the literature for the general population nism, reduced striatal acetylcholine release and modulation of dopa-
[181]. To minimize these risks patients should be instructed on proper mine synthesis and uptake [194]. One of the most well documented side
66

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
Fig. 3. Skin irritation and nodules after continuous subcutaneous infusion of carbidopa-levodopa.
NMDA receptors in the skin [197,198]. Livedo reticularis may occur
anywhere from months to years following initiation of amantadine
[195]. It is typicality considered a mild symptom, though patients may
view it as a reason to discontinue treatment. In rare cases patients have
developed skin ulceration related to livedo reticularis [199,200]. Livedo
reticularis tends to resolve 2–4 weeks after discontinuation of amanta-
dine [200].
4.3. Dopamine agonists
4.3.1. Oral dopamine agonists
Oral non-ergoline dopamine agonists used in the management of PD
include pramipexole and ropinirole. Like rotigotine, these medications
have high affinity for D2 and D3 receptors. Among all non-ergoline
dopamine agonist, lower extremity edema is a common potential side
effect

Chunk 26:
ends to resolve 2–4 weeks after discontinuation of amanta-
dine [200].
4.3. Dopamine agonists
4.3.1. Oral dopamine agonists
Oral non-ergoline dopamine agonists used in the management of PD
include pramipexole and ropinirole. Like rotigotine, these medications
have high affinity for D2 and D3 receptors. Among all non-ergoline
dopamine agonist, lower extremity edema is a common potential side
effect, reportedly occurring in anywhere from 11% to 42% of patients
[201–204]. Risk factors for developing lower extremity edema related to
dopamine agonist therapy include a history of coronary artery disease
and a history of diabetes mellitus [205]. There is conflicting evidence in
the literature as to whether or not there is a clear dose response rela-
tionship between lower extremity edema and dosage [205,206]. Edema
does not respond well to diuretic therapy, but resolves with discontin-
uation of the offending medication [206].
Ergoline dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine, cabergoline,
pergolide and lisuride are rarely used in current clinical practice due to
potential risk of valvular and lung fibrosis and safer non-ergoline op-
tions [207]. Notably, these medications have been associated with
developing an erythromelalgia-like skin eruption characterized by
painful erythema and edema of the feet and ankles [208,209]. In all
reported cases there was resolution with discontinuation of the drug.
4.3.2. Rotigotine
Rotigotine is a non-ergoline dopamine agonist with high affinity for
Fig. 4. Livedo reticularis seen on the legs of a PD patient after starting long- D2 and D3 receptors [210]. Due to extensive first pass metabolism, it has
acting amantadine.
low bioavailability when taken orally, however its high lipid solubility
makes it appropriate for transdermal application. Rotigotine is currently
effects is livedo reticularis, occurring in anywhere from 8% to 40% of applied once every 24 hours as a transdermal patch. Steady state
patients [194–197]. Livedo reticularis is 

Chunk 27:
s [210]. Due to extensive first pass metabolism, it has
acting amantadine.
low bioavailability when taken orally, however its high lipid solubility
makes it appropriate for transdermal application. Rotigotine is currently
effects is livedo reticularis, occurring in anywhere from 8% to 40% of applied once every 24 hours as a transdermal patch. Steady state
patients [194–197]. Livedo reticularis is characterized by skin pallor pharmacokinetic properties were analyzed in a review of 3 open label
surrounded by a reticular pattern of deoxygenated blood occurring clinical studies in healthy patients and patients with early PD [211].
primarily in the legs (Fig. 4), but may involve the hands as well [197]. Across all patients absorption ranged from 31 to 62%, however, vari-
The skin pallor is caused by arteriolar constriction leading to reduced ability of absorption was low within patients. There was some variability
blood flow and pallor in capillary beds. The reticulated pattern seen on in bioavailability based on application site with greater absorption in the
the skin develops when darker deoxygenated blood accumulates in the shoulder compared to the hip and flank. Plasma concentration of roti-
veins that lie in between capillary beds. Proposed mechanisms of arte- gotine achieves a stable steady state over 24 hours of patch usage.
riole vasoconstriction include the depletion of catecholamines at pe- Plasma concentrations also proportionally increased with higher doses
ripheral nerve terminals or by a yet unknown mechanism involving of rotigotine and absorption does not vary if administered via a large
67

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
patch or multiple small patches. improve nodule severity [219,226]. Other recommendations for treat-
The most common adverse event seen with rotigotine transdermal ment of skin nodules involve use of silicone gel dressings and massaging
patches are local skin re

Chunk 28:
administered via a large
67

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
patch or multiple small patches. improve nodule severity [219,226]. Other recommendations for treat-
The most common adverse event seen with rotigotine transdermal ment of skin nodules involve use of silicone gel dressings and massaging
patches are local skin reactions. In a review of 6 randomized double the area [219,225]. Recently, the US Food and Drug Administration
blind placebo controlled trials (RCTs) involving a total of 2224 patients approved a sublingual formulation of apomorphine as a rescue therapy
with early and advanced PD, adverse skin reactions were seen in of OFF periods in patients treated with levodopa. Although quite effec-
38–44% of patients with early PD and 15–41% of patients with tive and well tolerated, the application of the thin film in the sublingual
advanced PD [212]. Adverse skin reactions exhibit a dose dependent area for about 3 min per dose may be associated with oral mucosal er-
relationship [213]. Typical manifestations include erythema, edema or ythema and irritation [227].
pruritus that is limited to the patch area and may lead to discontinuation
in less than 8% of patients [212,213]. 4.4. Deep brain stimulation
Rotation of daily applications sites has been suggested to reduce the
incidence of local skin reactions [213]. Patients should not use the same DBS consists of placement of intracranial electrodes within the basal
application site more than once every 14 days. Additional recommen- ganglia, typically subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus interna, or the
dations from the manufacturer include ensuring that the patch is applied ventral intermediate nucleus. The proximal end of the electrodes is
to clean dry intact skin avoiding areas that could be rubbed by clothing, connected by a subcutaneous wire to an implantable pulse generator
waistbands or skin folds. Patients should also avoid creams,

Chunk 29:
ally subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus interna, or the
dations from the manufacturer include ensuring that the patch is applied ventral intermediate nucleus. The proximal end of the electrodes is
to clean dry intact skin avoiding areas that could be rubbed by clothing, connected by a subcutaneous wire to an implantable pulse generator
waistbands or skin folds. Patients should also avoid creams, lotions, placed subcutaneously usually in the upper chest or abdomen. It is often
ointments oils or powders over the skin area prior to application of the used in PD patients who have motor fluctuations and dyskinesia that are
patch. After 24 hours the patch should be removed slowly and carefully poorly controlled on oral medications [228]. Potential skin-related
to avoid irritation. Patients should wash previous applications sites with complications from DBS include hardware infection and skin erosions
soap and water to remove excess drug or adhesive. Baby or mineral oil is (Fig. 5) [229]. Hardware infection rates for DBS range from 0% to 15%
recommended to remove excess residue. Alcohol and other solvents in patients and an infection often precedes the development of skin
should be avoided. If a skin rash or irritation occurs as a result of the erosion [229,230]. In a large systematic review of 8983 patients who
patch, direct sunlight on the area should be avoided until the site heals underwent DBS implantation, 5.12% of patients developed hardware
as exposure could lead to changes in skin color [213]. We have also infection and skin erosion. The most common sites of infection were the
found that application of topical steroids accelerates the resolution of implantable pulse generator in the chest (27%), extension cables
the skin irritation. running post auricular from chest to the DBS leads (16%), the scalp area
A novel formulation of polymerized rotigotine called SER-214 has (9%), and at the site of the burr hole (8%) [230]. Skin erosion without
been developed to be de

Chunk 30:
ere the
found that application of topical steroids accelerates the resolution of implantable pulse generator in the chest (27%), extension cables
the skin irritation. running post auricular from chest to the DBS leads (16%), the scalp area
A novel formulation of polymerized rotigotine called SER-214 has (9%), and at the site of the burr hole (8%) [230]. Skin erosion without
been developed to be delivered as once weekly injections [214]. In an overlying infection was also reported in 0.8% of PD patients, most
open label multiple ascending dose cohort study of 19 PD patients to commonly at the site of the extension cable in the post auricular area
assess safety, patient plasma levels were shown to be highly stable with (28%) followed by the IPG location (12%) [230]. Low body mass index
minimal fluctuation after 2 weeks of dosing. Adverse events in the study (<24 kg/m2) is a risk factor for skin erosion [231].
included 2 patients who reported bruising at injection sites and 1 patient Several operative practices have been associated with hardware
who developed generalized hives and had to discontinue treatment
[214].
4.3.3. Apomorphine
Apomorphine is a potent dopamine agonist that stimulates striatal
D1-like and D2-like receptors and had originally been used as therapy
for PD prior to the introduction of levodopa therapy [215,216]. Oral
apomorphine is subject to extensive first past metabolism by the liver,
but subcutaneous administration reaches nearly 100% bioavailability
and a volume of distribution and half-life comparable to if it were
administered intravenously. It is indicated as a “rescue” medication
taken as needed for unpredictable OFF symptoms of PD or as a contin-
uous subcutaneous apomorphine infusion for PD patients who have se-
vere motor fluctuations not controlled on oral therapy [215,216]. Skin
nodules and infusion site erythema are common reactions. In one recent
randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 59% of
patients in the tr

Chunk 31:
icated as a “rescue” medication
taken as needed for unpredictable OFF symptoms of PD or as a contin-
uous subcutaneous apomorphine infusion for PD patients who have se-
vere motor fluctuations not controlled on oral therapy [215,216]. Skin
nodules and infusion site erythema are common reactions. In one recent
randomized, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial 59% of
patients in the treatment arm reported some skin changes at the injec-
tion site, 44% of patients reported skin nodules and 17% of patients
reported infusion site erythema [217]. Estimates of the incidence of skin
nodules in the literature vary considerably, with some reports suggest-
ing that nodules are seen in nearly all patients receiving subcutaneous
apomorphine [215,218,219]. In the majority of cases symptoms are
mild and not painful. Pathological specimens of these skin nodules
reveal evidence of panniculitis with fat necrosis and, in 50% of samples,
large numbers of eosinophils suggesting a possible hypersensitivity re-
action in addition to skin irritation as a potential explanation for the
pathophysiology [220]. In rare cases necrotic skin ulcers have been re-
ported in association with apomorphine subcutaneous infusion
[221–224]. Recommendations based on expert consensus for prevention
and management of skin nodules include rotating the choice of infusion
sites, using Teflon® needles, using an angle of 45–90 (degrees) for de-
livery, using lower concentration of apomorphine solution, and main-
taining skin hygiene at the infusion sites [225]. Ultrasound management
has been shown to accelerate normalization of tissue in skin nodules and Fig. 5. Skin erosion over the placement site of an intracranial DBS electrode.
68

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
infection. Higher risk patients include patients who undergo straight The diagnostic utility of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of PD has been
scalp incisions com

Chunk 32:
rate normalization of tissue in skin nodules and Fig. 5. Skin erosion over the placement site of an intracranial DBS electrode.
68

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
infection. Higher risk patients include patients who undergo straight The diagnostic utility of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of PD has been
scalp incisions compared to curved scalp incisions and patients who evaluated in post-mortem studies [249–252] and several in vivo studies
undergo staged procedures in which there is externalization of DBS [14,247,248,253–264]. A recent meta-analysis by Tsukita et al. of in
hardware [232]. Operative techniques that isolate the lead from the skin vivo skin biopsy in PD included 3 studies utilizing anti-nSyn and 9
surface at the incision sites can reduce the risk of developing hardware studies utilizing anti-pSyn antibodies, all with control groups excluding
infection [233]. Hardware infections are treated based on the site and other α-synucleinopathies (i.e. dementia with Lewy bodies [DLB], MSA,
area involved. Appropriate management involves aggressive treatment and pure autonomic failure [PAF]) [265]. Pooled sensitivity and speci-
that includes wound debridement, partial or total DBS hardware ficity were higher for anti-pSyn (0.76 and 1.00, respectively) than for
removal and/or tailored IV antibiotics [230,234]. The most common anti-nSyn (0.76 and 0.60, respectively). For anti-pSyn, higher number of
causative organism is staphylococcus aureus (20%) [230]. Skin erosion biopsy sites (≥5 versus ≤4) also correlated with higher sensitivity (0.90
is managed by surgical revisions that may include placement of a mus- versus 0.67, respectively) but not specificity (1.00 versus 1.00), whereas
culocutaneous flap, wound debridement, and hardware removal or the number of examined sections or the specific anti-pSyn antibody did
re-implantation. Recommendations to minimize the risk of skin erosion not signi

Chunk 33:
 correlated with higher sensitivity (0.90
is managed by surgical revisions that may include placement of a mus- versus 0.67, respectively) but not specificity (1.00 versus 1.00), whereas
culocutaneous flap, wound debridement, and hardware removal or the number of examined sections or the specific anti-pSyn antibody did
re-implantation. Recommendations to minimize the risk of skin erosion not significantly alter diagnostic accuracy. However, an analysis of pSyn
include using smaller hardware with a lower profile, recessing larger positivity rate in relation to both skin section thickness and number was
hardware components into drilled bone, using curvilinear cranial in- not performed; since the pSyn positivity rate increases with higher
cisions as opposed to straight incisions, applying anchoring sutures on number [259,261] and thicker sections analyzed [266], this likely
deep fascial layers rather than dermis, and, in thin patients, implanting influenced the observed pSyn rate. Furthermore, in contrast to the re-
the pulse generator under or directly onto or under the pectoralis fascia sults reported in the aforementioned meta-analysis [265], the recently
rather than into the subcutaneous fat [235,236]. published multicenter Systemic Synuclein Sampling Study (S4) found a
low sensitivity of just 24.1%, with an unchanged 100% specificity, for
5. Skin biopsy skin biopsy in the diagnosis of PD [267].
The exact skin biopsy site influences sensitivity of pSyn detection,
5.1. Diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease with proximal sites (especially the posterior cervical region) demon-
strating the highest sensitivity compared to distal sites in most [242,248,
The neuropathological hallmark of PD consists of marked loss of 259,260], but not all [253], studies of PD and DLB. This may suggest
pigmented dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and abnormal that abnormal α-syn arise in autonomic ganglia close to the spine and
filamentous inclusions of α-syn as the major component o

Chunk 34:
ating the highest sensitivity compared to distal sites in most [242,248,
The neuropathological hallmark of PD consists of marked loss of 259,260], but not all [253], studies of PD and DLB. This may suggest
pigmented dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and abnormal that abnormal α-syn arise in autonomic ganglia close to the spine and
filamentous inclusions of α-syn as the major component of Lewy pa- then spread to the closest autonomic terminals first and later affects
thology (LP), including Lewy bodies (neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions) autonomic terminals in distal sites [16]. Conversely, patients with PD
and Lewy neurites (in neuronal processes) [2,237]. However, the diag- and orthostatic hypotension (PD-OH), DLB with OH (DLB-OH), and PAF
nosis of PD in life is based on clinical criteria [238,239] with a diag- exhibit more widespread (proximal and distal) pSyn deposition in skin
nostic accuracy of about 70–80% compared with the neuropathological autonomic nerves [242,243,268,269]. However, serial skin biopsies in a
gold standard even when the diagnosis is made by a movement disorders patient with early PD-OH showed centrifugal spread of pSyn from
expert [240]. Such findings highlight the need for a reliable and accurate autonomic ganglia to target structures, but pSyn was first detected in the
biomarker in order to enhance diagnostic confidence, especially in early distal leg and thigh with spreading to cervical sites only detected 2 years
PD where accuracy might be particularly low [241]. Skin biopsy may later [270]. The strain of α-syn found in MSA is conformationally
help separate α-synucleinopathies from other proteinopathies such as different from that in PD [271], and the accumulation of pSyn is typi-
tauopathies (e.g. progressive supranuclear palsy) [242–244]. cally seen in distal cutaneous somatic (not autonomic) nerves with
Abnormal α-syn aggregates have been demonstrated in various pe- relatively preserved autonomic fibers in MSA [261,268]. The 

Chunk 35:
ionally
help separate α-synucleinopathies from other proteinopathies such as different from that in PD [271], and the accumulation of pSyn is typi-
tauopathies (e.g. progressive supranuclear palsy) [242–244]. cally seen in distal cutaneous somatic (not autonomic) nerves with
Abnormal α-syn aggregates have been demonstrated in various pe- relatively preserved autonomic fibers in MSA [261,268]. The skin
ripheral tissues, including the skin, salivary glands, adrenal glands, sampling site may therefore be of little importance in PD-OH, DLB-OH,
heart, retina, olfactory mucosa, and gastrointestinal tract [12,13]. Pe- and PAF except early in the course, whereas proximal sites have higher
ripheral α-syn pathology may precede widespread central disease and sensitivity in PD and DLB without OH, and distal sites may have higher
thus potentially account for prodromal symptoms of PD (dysautonomia, sensitivity in MSA.
including hypo- or hyperhidrosis, constipation, orthostatic hypotension, Recently, detection of oligomeric α-syn using a proximity ligation
urinary and erectile dysfunction, anosmia etc.) by disrupting axonal assay was proposed to identify abnormal α-syn at a stage in PD prior to
function and synaptic transmission. phosphorylation of α-syn aggregates [255]. In two recent studies using
Native α-syn (nSyn) is expressed both in the central nervous system real-time quacking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC), first used on patients
(CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS), including in dermal nerve with Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, pathological α-syn was detected in
fibers in healthy individuals and in patients with PD. Phosphorylated post-mortem posterior scalp skin biopsies from pathologically confirmed
α-syn (pSyn) is pathological and the main constituent of LP [245], PD patients with 96–100% sensitivity and specificity [272,273]. This
although the role of phosphorylation in the biology and pathophysi- and other techniques, such as Protein Misfolding Cyclic Amplification
ol

Chunk 36:
individuals and in patients with PD. Phosphorylated post-mortem posterior scalp skin biopsies from pathologically confirmed
α-syn (pSyn) is pathological and the main constituent of LP [245], PD patients with 96–100% sensitivity and specificity [272,273]. This
although the role of phosphorylation in the biology and pathophysi- and other techniques, such as Protein Misfolding Cyclic Amplification
ology of the protein remains controversial [246]. A recent study (PMCA) [273], have the possibility of bringing us closer to finding a
demonstrated that abnormal dermal α-syn aggregates are similar to pathognomonic biomarker for PD.
midbrain α-syn in PD patients, suggesting that demonstration and Published studies of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of PD have been
quantification of abnormal dermal α-syn may be a suitable surrogate for quite heterogeneous, especially related to sampling and immunohisto-
identification of CNS pathology and a relevant outcome marker in chemical techniques. Additional large-scale, multicenter studies are
clinical trials [14]. Dermal pSyn is found mainly in autonomic nerve needed to standardize and compare assessment techniques and to
terminals, richly innervating dermal autonomic annexes (blood vessels, evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of PD
pilomotor muscles, and sweat glands) [16]. Most immunohistochem- before routine clinical use can be recommended.
istry studies have utilized two main types of antibodies: against pSyn
(anti-pSyn) and against nSyn (anti-nSyn). While positive anti-nSyn 5.2. Skin fibroblasts and therapy of Parkinson’s disease
staining in dermal nerve fibers can be shown in individuals with PD
and in healthy controls [247], detection of abnormal (phosphorylated) Skin fibroblasts from patients with PD have served as a source of
α-syn aggregates with anti-pSyn is highly specific for PD [248]. induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with the possibility of using these
Conversely, false-positive staining o

Chunk 37:
arkinson’s disease
staining in dermal nerve fibers can be shown in individuals with PD
and in healthy controls [247], detection of abnormal (phosphorylated) Skin fibroblasts from patients with PD have served as a source of
α-syn aggregates with anti-pSyn is highly specific for PD [248]. induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with the possibility of using these
Conversely, false-positive staining of pSyn does not seem to be a relevant cells in the treatment of PD and in studying PD pathophysiology and
concern in healthy individuals as pSyn is expressed at very low levels in drug screening [274]. Although a detailed discussion about novel ther-
healthy nervous tissue [245]. apeutics based on skin biopsy is outside the scope of this review, a recent
69

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
and highly controversial single case report (“n-of-1” study) is worth Therapies; CHDI Foundation; Civitas/Acorda Therapeutics; Dystonia
mentioning. Schweitzer and colleagues described a 69-year-old man Coalition; Dystonia Medical Research Foundation; F. Hoffmann-La
with PD who had moderate parkinsonsism and limited treatment-related Roche Ltd; Huntington Study Group; Kyowa Haako Kirin Pharma, Inc;
complications (mild motor fluctuations and no dyskinesias), suggestive Medtronic Neuromodulation; Merz Pharmaceuticals; Michael J Fox
of suboptimal dosing of dopaminergic medications [17]. The patient Foundation for Parkinson Research; National Institutes of Health; Neu-
underwent implantation of patient-derived midbrain dopaminergic rocrine Biosciences; NeuroDerm Ltd; Parkinson’s Foundation; Nuvelu-
progenitor cells developed from skin fibroblasts into the putamina. tion; Parkinson Study Group; Pfizer Inc; Prothena Biosciences Inc;
Following implantation, the patient experienced some improvement of Psyadon Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Revance Therapeutics, Inc; Sangamo
symptoms according to the authors. However, the report ra

Chunk 38:
nergic rocrine Biosciences; NeuroDerm Ltd; Parkinson’s Foundation; Nuvelu-
progenitor cells developed from skin fibroblasts into the putamina. tion; Parkinson Study Group; Pfizer Inc; Prothena Biosciences Inc;
Following implantation, the patient experienced some improvement of Psyadon Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Revance Therapeutics, Inc; Sangamo
symptoms according to the authors. However, the report raises impor- BioSciences, Inc.; St. Jude Medical; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
tant clinical, scientific, and ethical concerns [18]. Despite these con- Dr. Jankovic has served as a consultant or as an advisory committee
cerns, autologous iPSCs as a source of stem cells hold promise for future member for: Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Allergan, Inc; Merz Phar-
therapeutic applications. maceuticals; Pfizer Inc; Prothena Biosciences; Revance Therapeutics,
Inc; Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
6. Conclusion Dr. Jankovic has received royalties or other payments from: Cam-
bridge; Elsevier; Future Science Group; Hodder Arnold; Medlink:
Skin-related manifestations of PD are common and well documented Neurology; Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; Wiley-Blackwell.
in the literature. However, these disorders are often overlooked or dis-
regarded by practitioners, including neurologists and dermatologists. Acknowledgements
Conditions such as SD or sweating dysfunction may precede the diag-
nosis of PD and could serve as potential diagnostic clue in early pre- The images in (Figs. 1 and 2) were kindly provided by Soo Jung Kim,
sentation of the conditions. As with other manifestations of PD, these MD, and Jennifer C. Martin, MD, Department of Dermatology, Baylor
conditions should not be dismissed as SD and sweating dysfunction may College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
be responsive to levodopa therapy. Melanoma is seen more commonly in
PD than in the general population, possibly due to shared risk factors References
and genetics. Iatrogenic complications related to PD therapy are c

Chunk 39:
PD, these MD, and Jennifer C. Martin, MD, Department of Dermatology, Baylor
conditions should not be dismissed as SD and sweating dysfunction may College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
be responsive to levodopa therapy. Melanoma is seen more commonly in
PD than in the general population, possibly due to shared risk factors References
and genetics. Iatrogenic complications related to PD therapy are com-
mon and may affect patient’s wellbeing or lead to discontinuation of [1] A. Ascherio, M.A. Schwarzschild, The epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease: risk
factors and prevention, Lancet Neurol. 15 (2016) 1257–1272, https://doi.org/
therapy. These can include mild discomfort due to side effects from oral
10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30230-7.
therapies (rash, peripheral edema etc), subcutaneous nodules due to [2] J. Jankovic, E.K. Tan, Parkinson’s disease: etiopathogenesis and treatment,
infusion therapies, or skin erosions and infections related to surgical J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91 (2020) 795–808, https://doi.org/10.1136/
jnnp-2019-322338.
hardware. The skin also plays an important role in PD therapy as a target
[3] A.H.V. Schapira, K.R. Chaudhuri, P. Jenner, Non-motor features of Parkinson
for both transdermal and subcutaneous application of medical therapy, disease, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18 (2017) 435–450, https://doi.org/10.1038/
as an emerging target for diagnostic skin biopsies, and as a possible nrn.2017.62.
[4] R. Gregory, S. Miller, Parkinson’s disease and the skin, Practical Neurol. 15
source of patient-derived stem cells for novel disease-modifying thera-
(2015) 246–249, https://doi.org/10.1136/practneurol-2015-001107.
pies in PD. [5] A.H. Ravn, J.P. Thyssen, A. Egeberg, Skin disorders in Parkinson’s disease:
potential biomarkers and risk factors, Clin. Cosmet. Invest. Dermatol. 10 (2017)
Funding 87–92, https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S130319.
[6] M. Skorvanek, K.P. Bhatia, The skin and Parkinson’s disease: review of clinical,
diagnostic, and therapeutic issues, Mo

Chunk 40:
, https://doi.org/10.1136/practneurol-2015-001107.
pies in PD. [5] A.H. Ravn, J.P. Thyssen, A. Egeberg, Skin disorders in Parkinson’s disease:
potential biomarkers and risk factors, Clin. Cosmet. Invest. Dermatol. 10 (2017)
Funding 87–92, https://doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S130319.
[6] M. Skorvanek, K.P. Bhatia, The skin and Parkinson’s disease: review of clinical,
diagnostic, and therapeutic issues, Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 4 (2017) 21–31,
There is no funding for this review but the authors wish to https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12425.
acknowledge the support of Parkinson’s Foundation for their Centers of [7] J.A. Adalsteinsson, S. Kaushik, S. Muzumdar, E. Guttman, J. Ungar, An update on
the microbiology, immunology and genetics of seborrheic dermatitis, Exp.
Excellence.
Dermatol. 29 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14091.
[8] C. Pont-Sunyer, A. Hotter, C. Gaig, K. Seppi, Y. Compta, R. Katzenschlager,
Ethics approval: N/A N W . . M Pi a r s k , e D r, . I H .J o . f P e o n s e a d d e a r, , T R . . B A ´ r l ü va ck re e z , , A L . . B Is a p y i ´e e s r , t o K , . O W . e D n e z e F l a` , b J r . e I g n u fa e n s, t e A , . H C . a Z ll a ´e c n h , ,
A. Palasí, M. Aguilar, M.J. Martí, F. Valldeoriola, M. Salamero, W. Poewe,
Consent to participate: N/A (patients depicted in Figs. 1–5 E. Tolosa, The onset of nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (the onset pd
completed a written consent form prior to photography; however, this is study), Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 229–237, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26077.
[9] Q. Ye, Y. Wen, N. Al-Kuwari, X. Chen, Association between Parkinson’s disease
not felt to be needed since the patients cannot be identified based on
and melanoma: putting the pieces together, Front. Aging Neurosci. 12 (2020) 60,
their pictures). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2020.00060.
Consent for publication: N/A. [10] N. Milani-Nejad, M. Zhang, J. Kaffenberger, The association between bullous
pemphigoid and neurological disorders: a systematic review,

Chunk 41:
Parkinson’s disease
not felt to be needed since the patients cannot be identified based on
and melanoma: putting the pieces together, Front. Aging Neurosci. 12 (2020) 60,
their pictures). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2020.00060.
Consent for publication: N/A. [10] N. Milani-Nejad, M. Zhang, J. Kaffenberger, The association between bullous
pemphigoid and neurological disorders: a systematic review, Eur. J. Dermatol. 27
Availability of data and material: N/A.
(2017) 472–481, https://doi.org/10.1684/ejd.2017.3066.
Code availability: N/A. [11] D. Savitt, J. Jankovic, Targeting α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease: progress
towards the development of disease-modifying therapeutics, Drugs 79 (2019)
Author contributions 797–810, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-019-01104-1.
[12] M. Fayyad, S. Salim, N. Majbour, D. Erskine, E. Stoops, B. Mollenhauer, O.M.
A. El-Agnaf, Parkinson’s disease biomarkers based on α-synuclein, J. Neurochem.
Nicki Niemann, MD: Conceptualized study, drafted the manuscript 150 (2019) 626–636, https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.14809.
for intellectual content. [13] L.Y. Ma, G.L. Liu, D.X. Wang, M.M. Zhang, W.Y. Kou, T. Feng, Alpha-synuclein in
peripheral tissues in Parkinson’s disease, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 10 (2019),
Andrew Billnitzer, MD: Drafted the manuscript for intellectual https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00383.
content. [14] A. Kuzkina, L. Schulmeyer, C.-M. Monoranu, J. Volkmann, C. Sommer,
Joseph Jankovic, MD: Conceptualized study, revised the manuscript K. Doppler, The aggregation state of α-synuclein deposits in dermal nerve fibers of
patients with Parkinson’s disease resembles that in the brain, Park. Relat. Disord.
for intellectual content. 64 (2019) 66–72, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.03.003.
[15] K.A. Jellinger, Neuropathology of nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, in:
Declaration of competing interest Int. Rev. Neurobiol, Int Rev Neurobiol, 2017, pp. 13–62, https://doi.org/
10.1016/bs.irn.2017.05.005.
[16] V. Donadio, Skin 

Chunk 42:
son’s disease resembles that in the brain, Park. Relat. Disord.
for intellectual content. 64 (2019) 66–72, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.03.003.
[15] K.A. Jellinger, Neuropathology of nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, in:
Declaration of competing interest Int. Rev. Neurobiol, Int Rev Neurobiol, 2017, pp. 13–62, https://doi.org/
10.1016/bs.irn.2017.05.005.
[16] V. Donadio, Skin nerve α-synuclein deposits in Parkinson’s disease and other
Nicki Niemann: None. synucleinopathies: a review, Clin. Auton. Res. 29 (2019) 577–585, https://doi.
Andrew Billnitzer: None. org/10.1007/s10286-018-0581-4.
[17] J.S. Schweitzer, B. Song, T.M. Herrington, T.Y. Park, N. Lee, S. Ko, J. Jeon, Y. Cha,
Joseph Jankovic: Dr. Jankovic has received research and/or training
K. Kim, Q. Li, C. Henchcliffe, M. Kaplitt, C. Neff, O. Rapalino, H. Seo, I.H. Lee,
grants from: Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Allergan, Inc; Biotie
70

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
J. Kim, T. Kim, G.A. Petsko, J. Ritz, B.M. Cohen, S.W. Kong, P. Leblanc, B. [42] J.H. Olsen, K. Tangerud, L. Wermuth, K. Frederiksen, S. Friis, Treatment with
S. Carter, K.S. Kim, Personalized iPSC-derived dopamine progenitor cells for levodopa and risk for malignant melanoma, Mov. Disord. 22 (2007) 1252–1257,
Parkinson’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 382 (2020) 1926–1932, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21397.
10.1056/NEJMoa1915872. [43] F. Rampen, Melanoma and levodopa, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 38 (1998) 782–784,
[18] J. Jankovic, M.S. Okun, J.H. Kordower, Stem cells: scientific and ethical https://doi.org/10.1016/S0190-9622(98)70219-1.
quandaries of a personalized approach to Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. [44] M. Berwick, Counterpoint: sunscreen use is a safe and effective approach to skin
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28187. cancer prevention, Cancer Epidemiol, Biomarkers Prev 16 (2007) 1923–1924,
[19] P. Zhang, B. Liu, Associatio

Chunk 43:
dower, Stem cells: scientific and ethical https://doi.org/10.1016/S0190-9622(98)70219-1.
quandaries of a personalized approach to Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. [44] M. Berwick, Counterpoint: sunscreen use is a safe and effective approach to skin
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28187. cancer prevention, Cancer Epidemiol, Biomarkers Prev 16 (2007) 1923–1924,
[19] P. Zhang, B. Liu, Association between Parkinson’s disease and risk of cancer: a https://doi.org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-0391.
PRISMA-compliant meta-analysis, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 10 (2019) 4430–4439, [45] R. Inzelberg, Y. Samuels, E. Azizi, N. Qutob, L. Inzelberg, E. Domany,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.9b00498. E. Schechtman, E. Friedman, Parkinson disease (PARK) genes are somatically
[20] A. Bajaj, J.A. Driver, E.S. Schernhammer, Parkinson’s disease and cancer risk: a mutated in cutaneous melanoma, Neurol. Genet. 2 (2016) e70, https://doi.org/
systematic review and meta-analysis, Cancer Causes Control 21 (2010) 697–707, 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000070.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10552-009-9497-6. [46] H.H. Hu, C. Kannengiesser, S. Lesage, J. Andr´e, S. Mourah, L. Michel,
[21] A.F. Fois, C.J. Wotton, D. Yeates, M.R. Turner, M.J. Goldacre, Cancer in patients V. Descamps, N. Basset-Seguin, M. Bagot, A. Bensussan, C. Lebb´e, L. Deschamps,
with motor neuron disease, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease: record P. Saiag, M.T. Leccia, B. Bressac-De-Paillerets, A. Tsalamlal, R. Kumar, S. Klebe,
linkage studies, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 81 (2010) 215–221, https://doi. B. Grandchamp, N. Andrieu-Abadie, L. Thomas, A. Brice, N. Dumaz, N. Soufir,
org/10.1136/jnnp.2009.175463. PARKIN inactivation links Parkinson’s disease to melanoma, J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
[22] B. Jansson, J. Jankovic, Low cancer rates among patients with Parkinson’s 108 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djv340.
disease, Ann. Neurol. 17 (1985) 505–509, https://doi.org/10.1002/ [47] L. Levin, S. Srour, J. Gartner, O. Kapitansky

Chunk 44:
e, L. Thomas, A. Brice, N. Dumaz, N. Soufir,
org/10.1136/jnnp.2009.175463. PARKIN inactivation links Parkinson’s disease to melanoma, J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
[22] B. Jansson, J. Jankovic, Low cancer rates among patients with Parkinson’s 108 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djv340.
disease, Ann. Neurol. 17 (1985) 505–509, https://doi.org/10.1002/ [47] L. Levin, S. Srour, J. Gartner, O. Kapitansky, N. Qutob, S. Dror, T. Golan,
ana.410170514. R. Dayan, R. Brener, T. Ziv, M. Khaled, O. Schueler-Furman, Y. Samuels, C. Levy,
[23] R. Inzelberg, J. Jankovic, Are Parkinson disease patients protected from some but Parkin somatic mutations link melanoma and Parkinson’s disease, J. Genet.
not all cancers? Neurology 69 (2007) 1542–1550, https://doi.org/10.1212/01. Genomics. 43 (2016) 369–379, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgg.2016.05.005.
wnl.0000277638.63767.b8. [48] U. Dube, L. Ibanez, J.P. Budde, B.A. Benitez, A.A. Davis, O. Harari, M.M. Iles, M.
[24] H.J. Ryu, J.-H. Park, M. Choi, J.-H. Jung, K. Han, D.-Y. Kwon, D.-H. Kim, Y.- H. Law, K.M. Brown, M. Agee, B. Alipanahi, A. Auton, R.K. Bell, K. Bryc, S.
G. Park, Parkinson’s disease and skin cancer risk: a nationwide population-based L. Elson, P. Fontanillas, N.A. Furlotte, D.A. Hinds, K.E. Huber, A. Kleinman, N.
cohort study in Korea, J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. (2020), https://doi.org/ K. Litterman, J.C. McCreight, M.H. McIntyre, J.L. Mountain, E.S. Noblin, C.A.
10.1111/jdv.16462. M. Northover, S.J. Pitts, J.F. Sathirapongsasuti, O.V. Sazonova, J.F. Shelton,
[25] L.A. Dalvin, G.M. Damento, B.P. Yawn, B.A. Abbott, D.O. Hodge, J.S. Pulido, S. Shringarpure, C. Tian, J.Y. Tung, V. Vacic, C.H. Wilson, M.H. Law, D.T. Bishop,
Parkinson Disease, Melanoma, Mayo Clin. Proc. 92 (2017) 1070–1079, https:// J.E. Lee, M. Brossard, N.G. Martin, E.K. Moses, F. Song, J.H. Barrett, R. Kumar, D.
doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2017.03.014. F. Easton, P.D. Pharoah, A.J. Swerdlow, K.P. Kypreou, J.C. Taylor, M. Harland,
[26] X. Cui, Z. Liew, J. Hansen

Chunk 45:
 Pulido, S. Shringarpure, C. Tian, J.Y. Tung, V. Vacic, C.H. Wilson, M.H. Law, D.T. Bishop,
Parkinson Disease, Melanoma, Mayo Clin. Proc. 92 (2017) 1070–1079, https:// J.E. Lee, M. Brossard, N.G. Martin, E.K. Moses, F. Song, J.H. Barrett, R. Kumar, D.
doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2017.03.014. F. Easton, P.D. Pharoah, A.J. Swerdlow, K.P. Kypreou, J.C. Taylor, M. Harland,
[26] X. Cui, Z. Liew, J. Hansen, P.C. Lee, O.A. Arah, B. Ritz, Cancers preceding J. Randerson-Moor, L.A. Akslen, P.A. Andresen, M.F. Avril, E. Azizi, G.B. Scarr`a,
Parkinson’s disease after adjustment for bias in a Danish population-based case- K.M. Brown, T. Debniak, D.L. Duffy, D.E. Elder, S. Fang, E. Friedman, P. Galan,
control study, Neuroepidemiology 52 (2019) 136–143, https://doi.org/10.1159/ P. Ghiorzo, E.M. Gillanders, A.M. Goldstein, N.A. Gruis, J. Hansson, P. Helsing,
000494292. M. Hoˇcevar, V. Ho¨iom, C. Ingvar, P.A. Kanetsky, W.V. Chen, M.T. Landi, J. Lang,
[27] A. Mahajan, M. Chirra, A.K. Dwivedi, A. Sturchio, E.G. Keeling, L. Marsili, A. G.M. Lathrop, J. Lubin´ski, R.M. Mackie, G.J. Mann, A. Molven, G.
J. Espay, Skin cancer may delay onset but not progression of Parkinson’s disease: W. Montgomery, S. Novakovi´c, H. Olsson, S. Puig, J.A. Puig-Butille, W. Wu, A.
a nested case-control study, Front. Neurol. 11 (2020), https://doi.org/10.3389/ A. Qureshi, G.L. Radford-Smith, N. van der Stoep, R. van Doorn, D.C. Whiteman,
fneur.2020.00406. J.E. Craig, E. Schadendorf, L.A. Simms, K.P. Burdon, D.R. Nyholt, K.A. Pooley,
[28] P. Huang, X.-D. Yang, S.-D. Chen, Q. Xiao, The association between Parkinson’s N. Orr, A.J. Stratigos, A.E. Cust, S.V. Ward, N.K. Hayward, J. Han, H.J. Schulze,
disease and melanoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Transl. A.M. Dunning, J.A. Bishop, F. Demenais, C.I. Amos, S. MacGregor, M.M. Iles,
Neurodegener. 4 (2015) 21, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-015-0044-y. C. Cruchaga, Overlapping genetic architecture between Parkinson disease and
[29] X. Gao, K.C. Simon, J. Han

Chunk 46:
rr, A.J. Stratigos, A.E. Cust, S.V. Ward, N.K. Hayward, J. Han, H.J. Schulze,
disease and melanoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Transl. A.M. Dunning, J.A. Bishop, F. Demenais, C.I. Amos, S. MacGregor, M.M. Iles,
Neurodegener. 4 (2015) 21, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-015-0044-y. C. Cruchaga, Overlapping genetic architecture between Parkinson disease and
[29] X. Gao, K.C. Simon, J. Han, M.A. Schwarzschild, A. Ascherio, Family history of melanoma, Acta Neuropathol. 139 (2020) 347–364, https://doi.org/10.1007/
melanoma and Parkinson disease risk, Neurology 73 (2009) 1286–1291, https:// s00401-019-02110-z.
doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181bd13a1. [49] O. Karlsson, N.G. Lindquist, Melanin and neuromelanin binding of drugs and
[30] S. Lerman, B. Amichai, G. Weinstein, V. Shalev, G. Chodick, Parkinson’s disease, chemicals: toxicological implications, Arch. Toxicol. 90 (2016) 1883–1891,
melanoma, and keratinocyte carcinoma: a population-based study, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-016-1757-0.
Neuroepidemiology 50 (2018) 168–173, https://doi.org/10.1159/000487855. [50] F.A. Zucca, J. Segura-Aguilar, E. Ferrari, P. Mun˜oz, I. Paris, D. Sulzer, T. Sarna,
[31] I. Agalliu, R.A. Ortega, M.S. Luciano, A. Mirelman, C. Pont-Sunyer, L. Casella, L. Zecca, Interactions of iron, dopamine and neuromelanin pathways in
K. Brockmann, D. Vilas, E. Tolosa, D. Berg, B. Warø, A. Glickman, D. Raymond, brain aging and Parkinson’s disease, Prog. Neurobiol. 155 (2017) 96–119,
R. Inzelberg, J. Ruiz-Martinez, E. Mondragon, E. Friedman, S. Hassin-Baer, R. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.012.
N. Alcalay, H. Mejia-Santana, J. Aasly, T. Foroud, K. Marder, N. Giladi, [51] T. Pan, J. Zhu, W.J. Hwu, J. Jankovic, The role of alpha-synuclein in melanin
S. Bressman, R. Saunders-Pullman, Cancer outcomes among Parkinson’s disease synthesis in melanoma and dopaminergic neuronal cells, PloS One 7 (2012),
patients with leucine rich repeat kinase 2 mutations, idiopathic Parkinson’s https://doi.o

Chunk 47:
12.
N. Alcalay, H. Mejia-Santana, J. Aasly, T. Foroud, K. Marder, N. Giladi, [51] T. Pan, J. Zhu, W.J. Hwu, J. Jankovic, The role of alpha-synuclein in melanin
S. Bressman, R. Saunders-Pullman, Cancer outcomes among Parkinson’s disease synthesis in melanoma and dopaminergic neuronal cells, PloS One 7 (2012),
patients with leucine rich repeat kinase 2 mutations, idiopathic Parkinson’s https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0045183.
disease patients, and nonaffected controls, Mov. Disord. 34 (2019) 1392–1398, [52] X. Chen, D. Feng, M.A. Schwarzschild, X. Gao, Red hair, MC1R variants, and risk
https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27807. for Parkinson’s disease - a meta-analysis, Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 4 (2017),
[32] M. Disse, H. Reich, P.K. Lee, S.S. Schram, A review of the association between https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.381.
Parkinson disease and malignant melanoma, Dermatol. Surg. 42 (2016) 141–146, [53] A.T. Slominski, A.A. Brozyna, M.A. Zmijewski, W. Jo´zwicki, A.M. Jetten, R.
https://doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000000591. S. Mason, R.C. Tuckey, C.A. Elmets, Vitamin D signaling and melanoma: role of
[33] A. Bose, G.A. Petsko, D. Eliezer, Parkinson’s disease and melanoma: Co- Vitamin D and its receptors in melanoma progression and management, Lab.
occurrence and mechanisms, J. Parkinsons Dis. 8 (2018) 385–398, https://doi. Invest. 97 (2017) 706–724, https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.2017.3.
org/10.3233/JPD-171263. [54] J. Gao, J. Teng, Z. Liu, M. Cai, A. Xie, Association between vitamin D receptor
[34] T. Pan, X. Li, J. Jankovic, The association between Parkinson’s disease and polymorphisms and susceptibility to Parkinson’s disease: an updated meta-
melanoma, Int. J. Canc. 128 (2011) 2251–2260, https://doi.org/10.1002/ analysis, Neurosci. Lett. 720 (2020) 134778, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijc.25912. neulet.2020.134778.
[35] J.J. Ferreira, D. Neutel, T. Mestre, M. Coelho, M.M. Rosa, O. Rascol, C. Sampaio, [55] M. Birke, J. Schope, S. Wagenpfeil, T. Vogt, J. Reichrath, Asso

Chunk 48:
ymorphisms and susceptibility to Parkinson’s disease: an updated meta-
melanoma, Int. J. Canc. 128 (2011) 2251–2260, https://doi.org/10.1002/ analysis, Neurosci. Lett. 720 (2020) 134778, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijc.25912. neulet.2020.134778.
[35] J.J. Ferreira, D. Neutel, T. Mestre, M. Coelho, M.M. Rosa, O. Rascol, C. Sampaio, [55] M. Birke, J. Schope, S. Wagenpfeil, T. Vogt, J. Reichrath, Association of Vitamin D
Skin cancer and Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 25 (2010) 139–148, https:// receptor gene polymorphisms with melanoma risk: a meta-analysis and
doi.org/10.1002/mds.22855. systematic review, Anticancer Res. 40 (2020) 583–595, https://doi.org/
[36] American Parkinson Disease Association, Parkinson’s disease & risk of cancer. 10.21873/anticanres.13988.
https://www.apdaparkinson.org/article/cancer-and-parkinsons-disease/. [56] A. Tao, G. Chen, Y. Deng, R. Xu, Accuracy of transcranial sonography of the
(Accessed 26 July 2020). substantia nigra for detection of Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and
[37] C. Paisa´n-Ruiz, H. Houlden, Common pathogenic pathways in melanoma and meta-analysis, Ultrasound Med. Biol. 45 (2019) 628–641, https://doi.org/
Parkinson disease, Neurology 75 (2010) 1653–1655, https://doi.org/10.1212/ 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2018.11.010.
WNL.0b013e3181fb4466. [57] J.J. Rumpf, D. Weise, C. Fricke, T. Wetzig, J.C. Simon, J. Classen, Sonographic
[38] J.L. Skibba, J. Pinckley, E.F. Gilbert, R.O. Johnson, Multiple primary melanoma abnormality of the substantia nigra in melanoma patients, Mov. Disord. 28 (2013)
following administration of levodopa, Arch. Pathol. 93 (1972) 556–561. 219–224, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.25233.
[39] R. Sandyk, Accelerated growth of malignant melanoma by levodopa in [58] U. Walter, E. Heilmann, J. Voss, K. Riedel, A. Zhivov, S.G. Sch¨ad, G.E. Gross,
Parkinson’s disease and role of the pineal Gland, Int. J. Neurosci. 63 (1992) R. Benecke, J. Trcka, Frequency and profile of Parkinson’s disease prodromi in
137–140

Chunk 49:
, Arch. Pathol. 93 (1972) 556–561. 219–224, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.25233.
[39] R. Sandyk, Accelerated growth of malignant melanoma by levodopa in [58] U. Walter, E. Heilmann, J. Voss, K. Riedel, A. Zhivov, S.G. Sch¨ad, G.E. Gross,
Parkinson’s disease and role of the pineal Gland, Int. J. Neurosci. 63 (1992) R. Benecke, J. Trcka, Frequency and profile of Parkinson’s disease prodromi in
137–140, https://doi.org/10.3109/00207459208986663. patients with malignant melanoma, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87 (2016)
[40] K.H. Fiala, J. Whetteckey, B.V. Manyam, Malignant melanoma and levodopa in 302–310, https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp-2014-310239.
Parkinson’s disease: causality or coincidence? Park. Relat. Disord. 9 (2003) [59] J.J. Rumpf, M. Schirmer, C. Fricke, D. Weise, J.A. Wagner, J. Simon, J. Classen,
321–327, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-8020(03)00040-3. Light pigmentation phenotype is correlated with increased substantia nigra
[41] R. Constantinescu, M. Romer, K. Kieburtz, Malignant melanoma in early echogenicity, Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 1848–1852, https://doi.org/10.1002/
Parkinson’s disease: the DATATOP trial, Mov. Disord. 22 (2007) 720–722, mds.26427.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21273. [60] L.E. Davis, S.C. Shalin, A.J. Tackett, Current state of melanoma diagnosis and
treatment, Canc. Biol. Ther. 20 (2019) 1366–1379, https://doi.org/10.1080/
15384047.2019.1640032.
71

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[61] J. Peyrí, M. Lleonart, Clinical and therapeutic profile and quality of life of patients [84] C. Tanner, K. Albers, S. Goldman, R. Fross, A. Leimpeter, J. Klingman, S. Van Den
with seborrheic dermatitis, Actas Dermosifiliogr 98 (2007) 476–482, https://doi. Eeden, Seborrheic dermatitis and risk of future Parkinson’s disease (PD) [meeting
org/10.1016/s1578-2190(07)70491-2. abstract], Neurology 78 (2012).
[62] D. Krestin, The seborrhoeic facies as a manifestation of post-encephalitic [8

Chunk 50:
 [84] C. Tanner, K. Albers, S. Goldman, R. Fross, A. Leimpeter, J. Klingman, S. Van Den
with seborrheic dermatitis, Actas Dermosifiliogr 98 (2007) 476–482, https://doi. Eeden, Seborrheic dermatitis and risk of future Parkinson’s disease (PD) [meeting
org/10.1016/s1578-2190(07)70491-2. abstract], Neurology 78 (2012).
[62] D. Krestin, The seborrhoeic facies as a manifestation of post-encephalitic [85] S. Shuster, A.J. Thody, S.K. Goolamali, J.L. Burton, N. Plummer, D. Bates,
parkinsonism and allied disorders, QJM. os- 21 (1927) 177–186, https://doi.org/ MELANOCYTE-STIMULATING hormone and parkinsonism, Lancet 301 (1973)
10.1093/qjmed/os-21.81.177. 463–465, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(73)91885-0.
[63] M. Fischer, I. Gemende, W.C. Marsch, P.A. Fischer, Skin function and skin [86] J.L. Burton, S. Shuster, Effect of l-dopa on seborrhoea of parkinsonism, Lancet
disorders in Parkinson’s disease, J. Neural. Transm. 108 (2001) 205–213, https:// 296 (1970) 19–20, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(70)92476-1.
doi.org/10.1007/s007020170088. [87] J.A. Cotterill, W.J. Cunliffe, B. Williamson, W.A. Arrowsmith, J.B. Cook,
[64] D.D. Harville, O. Appenzeller, A new approach to the reduction of sebum D. Sumner, Sebum-excretion rate and skin-surface lipid composition in
secretion, Arch. Dermatol. 103 (1971) 492, https://doi.org/10.1001/ Parkinson’s disease before and during therapy with levodopa, Lancet 297 (1971)
archderm.1971.04000170026005. 1271–1272, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(71)91782-X.
[65] I. Antunes, K.S.M. Purim, L.L. Grande, N.C. Alberton, T.F.R. Navarro, T.C. d’A ´ vila [88] N.C. Cowley, P.M. Farr, S. Shuster, The permissive effect of sebum in seborrhoeic
Winckler, Dermatoses in parkinsonism: the importance of multidisciplinary dermatitis: an explanation of the rash in neurological disorders, Br. J. Dermatol.
follow-up, Rev. Assoc. Med. Bras. 65 (2019) 791–795, https://doi.org/10.1590/ 122 (1990) 71–76, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb08241.x.
1806-

Chunk 51:
la [88] N.C. Cowley, P.M. Farr, S. Shuster, The permissive effect of sebum in seborrhoeic
Winckler, Dermatoses in parkinsonism: the importance of multidisciplinary dermatitis: an explanation of the rash in neurological disorders, Br. J. Dermatol.
follow-up, Rev. Assoc. Med. Bras. 65 (2019) 791–795, https://doi.org/10.1590/ 122 (1990) 71–76, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2133.1990.tb08241.x.
1806-9282.65.6.791. [89] E. Jacobsen, J.K. Billings, R.A. Frantz, C.K. Kinney, M.E. Stewart, D.T. Downing,
[66] A. Antonini, P. Barone, R. Marconi, L. Morgante, S. Zappulla, F.E. Pontieri, Age-related changes in sebaceous wax ester secretion rates in men and women,
S. Ramat, M.G. Ceravolo, G. Meco, G. Cicarelli, M. Pederzoli, M. Manfredi, J. Invest. Dermatol. 85 (1985) 483–485, https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747.
R. Ceravolo, M. Mucchiut, G. Volpe, G. Abbruzzese, E. Bottacchi, L. Bartolomei, ep12277224.
G. Ciacci, A. Cannas, M.G. Randisi, A. Petrone, M. Baratti, V. Toni, G. Cossu, [90] J.L. Burton, R.J. Pye, Seborrhoea is not a feature of seborrhoeic dermatitis, Br.
P. Del Dotto, A.R. Bentivoglio, M. Abrignani, R. Scala, F. Pennisi, R. Quatrale, R. Med. J. 286 (1983) 1169–1170, https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.286.6372.1169.
M. Gaglio, A. Nicoletti, M. Perini, T. Avarello, A. Pisani, A. Scaglioni, P. [91] D.M.L. Saunte, G. Gaitanis, R.J. Hay, Malassezia-associated skin diseases, the use
E. Martinelli, F. Iemolo, L. Ferigo, P. Simone, P. Soliveri, B. Troianiello, of diagnostics and treatment, Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10 (2020) 63–67,
D. Consoli, A. Mauro, L. Lopiano, G. Nastasi, C. Colosimo, The progression of non- https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2020.00112.
motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease and their contribution to motor disability [92] C. Dessinioti, A. Katsambas, Seborrheic dermatitis: etiology, risk factors, and
and quality of life, J. Neurol. 259 (2012) 2621–2631, https://doi.org/10.1007/ treatments: facts and controversies, Clin. Dermatol. 31 (2013) 343–351, https://
s0

Chunk 52:
simo, The progression of non- https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2020.00112.
motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease and their contribution to motor disability [92] C. Dessinioti, A. Katsambas, Seborrheic dermatitis: etiology, risk factors, and
and quality of life, J. Neurol. 259 (2012) 2621–2631, https://doi.org/10.1007/ treatments: facts and controversies, Clin. Dermatol. 31 (2013) 343–351, https://
s00415-012-6557-8. doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2013.01.001.
[67] S.R. Kohn, P.E. Pochi, J.S. Strauss, D.S. Sax, R.G. Feldman, W.H. Timberlake, [93] L. Shuo, Y. Ting, W. KeLun, Z. Rui, Z. Rui, W. Hang, Efficacy and possible
Sebaceous gland secretion in Parkinson’s disease during L-dopa treatment, mechanisms of botulinum toxin treatment of oily skin, J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 18
J. Invest. Dermatol. 60 (1973) 134–136, https://doi.org/10.1111/1523-1747. (2019) 451–457, https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.12866.
ep12682040. [94] A. Diamond, J. Jankovic, Botulinum toxin in dermatology - beyond wrinkles and
[68] E. Martignoni, L. Godi, C. Pacchetti, E. Berardesca, G.P. Vignoli, G. Albani, sweat, J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 5 (2006) 169, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1473-
F. Mancini, G. Nappi, Is seborrhea a sign of autonomic impairment in Parkinson’s 2165.2006.00250.x. –169.
disease? J. Neural. Transm. 104 (1997) 1295–1304, https://doi.org/10.1007/ [95] D.J. van Wamelen, V. Leta, A.M. Podlewska, Y.M. Wan, K. Krbot, E. Jaakkola,
BF01294730. P. Martinez-Martin, A. Rizos, M. Parry, V. Metta, K. Ray Chaudhuri, Exploring
[69] C.J. O’Neill, M.D. Richardson, A. Charlett, L. McHugh, S.G. Bowes, A.G. Purkiss, hyperhidrosis and related thermoregulatory symptoms as a possible clinical
C. Weller, S.M. Dobbs, R.J. Dobbs, Could seborrhoeic dermatitis be implicated in identifier for the dysautonomic subtype of Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 266
the pathogenesis of parkinsonism? Acta Neurol. Scand. 89 (1994) 252–257, (2019) 1736–1742, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09325-w.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.1

Chunk 53:
drosis and related thermoregulatory symptoms as a possible clinical
C. Weller, S.M. Dobbs, R.J. Dobbs, Could seborrhoeic dermatitis be implicated in identifier for the dysautonomic subtype of Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 266
the pathogenesis of parkinsonism? Acta Neurol. Scand. 89 (1994) 252–257, (2019) 1736–1742, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09325-w.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.1994.tb01675.x. [96] B. Zakrzewska-Pniewska, Z. Jamrozik, Are electrophysiological autonomic tests
[70] J.L. Burton, M. Cartlidge, N.E. Cartlidge, S. Shuster, Sebum excretion in useful in the assessment of dysautonomia in Parkinson’s disease? Park. Relat.
parkinsonism, Br. J. Dermatol. 88 (1973) 263–266, https://doi.org/10.1111/ Disord. 9 (2003) 179–183, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-8020(02)00032-9.
j.1365-2133.1973.tb07545.x. [97] S.-M. Cheon, M.J. Park, W.-J. Kim, J.W. Kim, Non-motor off symptoms in
[71] J.L. Burton, M. Cartlidge, S. Shuster, Effect of L-dopa on the seborrhoea of Parkinson’s disease, J. Kor. Med. Sci. 24 (2009) 311–314, https://doi.org/
parkinsonism, Br. J. Dermatol. 88 (1973) 475–479, https://doi.org/10.1111/ 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.2.311.
j.1365-2133.1973.tb15453.x. [98] D. Crosiers, B. Pickut, J. Theuns, P.P. De Deyn, C. Van Broeckhoven, P. Martinez-
[72] T. Cornbleet, D. Cohen, H.C. Schorr, Excessive oiliness of the skin and paralysis Martin, K.R. Chaudhuri, P. Cras, Non-motor symptoms in a Flanders-Belgian
agitans, Arch. Dermatol. Syphilol. 54 (1946) 93. population of 215 Parkinson’s disease patients as assessed by the Non-Motor
[73] A. Charlett, R.J. Dobbs, S.M. Dobbs, C. Weller, P. Brady, D.W. Peterson, Symptoms Questionnaire, Am. J. Neurodegener. Dis. 1 (2012) 160–167.
Parkinsonism: siblings share Helicobacter pylori seropositivity and facets of [99] P. Martinez-Martin, C.F. Pecurariu, P. Odin, J.J. Van Hilten, A. Antonini, J.
syndrome, Acta Neurol. Scand. 99 (2009) 26–35, https://doi.org/10.1111/ M. Rojo-Abuin, V. Borges, C. Trenkwalder, D. Aarsland

Chunk 54:
M. Dobbs, C. Weller, P. Brady, D.W. Peterson, Symptoms Questionnaire, Am. J. Neurodegener. Dis. 1 (2012) 160–167.
Parkinsonism: siblings share Helicobacter pylori seropositivity and facets of [99] P. Martinez-Martin, C.F. Pecurariu, P. Odin, J.J. Van Hilten, A. Antonini, J.
syndrome, Acta Neurol. Scand. 99 (2009) 26–35, https://doi.org/10.1111/ M. Rojo-Abuin, V. Borges, C. Trenkwalder, D. Aarsland, D.J. Brooks, K.
j.1600-0404.1999.tb00654.x. R. Chaudhuri, Gender-related differences in the burden of non-motor symptoms
[74] V.S. Arsic Arsenijevic, D. Milobratovic, A.M. Barac, B. Vekic, J. Marinkovic, V. in Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 259 (2012) 1639–1647, https://doi.org/
S. Kostic, A laboratory-based study on patients with Parkinson’s disease and 10.1007/s00415-011-6392-3.
seborrheic dermatitis: the presence and density of Malassezia yeasts, their [100] E. Trachani, C. Constantoyannis, V. Sirrou, Z. Kefalopoulou, E. Markaki,
different species and enzymes production, BMC Dermatol. 14 (2014) 5, https:// E. Chroni, Effects of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation on sweating
doi.org/10.1186/1471-5945-14-5. function in Parkinson’s disease, Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 112 (2010) 213–217,
[75] R.L. Binder, F.J. Jonelis, Seborrheic dermatitis in neuroleptic-induced https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2009.11.015.
parkinsonism, Arch. Dermatol. 119 (1983) 473–475. [101] A.H. Rajput, B. Rozdilsky, Dysautonomia in Parkinsonism: a clinicopathological
[76] K. Noda, T. Kobayashi, S. Matsuoka, M. Takanashi, A. Kanazawa, Y. Mizuno, study, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 39 (1976) 1092–1100, https://doi.org/
A 65-year-old man with rigid-bradykinetic parkinsonism, vertical gaze palsy, 10.1136/jnnp.39.11.1092.
difficulty of eye-lid opening, and marked pseudo-bulbar palsy, Brain Nerve 57 [102] M.J. Aminoff, C.S. Wilcox, Assessment of autonomic function in patients with a
(2005) 73–86. parkinsonian syndrome, Br. Med. J. 4 (1971) 80, https://doi.org/10.1136/
[77] F.R. Bettley, R.H. 

Chunk 55:
–1100, https://doi.org/
A 65-year-old man with rigid-bradykinetic parkinsonism, vertical gaze palsy, 10.1136/jnnp.39.11.1092.
difficulty of eye-lid opening, and marked pseudo-bulbar palsy, Brain Nerve 57 [102] M.J. Aminoff, C.S. Wilcox, Assessment of autonomic function in patients with a
(2005) 73–86. parkinsonian syndrome, Br. Med. J. 4 (1971) 80, https://doi.org/10.1136/
[77] F.R. Bettley, R.H. Marten, Unilateral seborrheic dermatitis following a nerve bmj.4.5779.80.
lesion, A. M. A. Arch. Dermatology. 73 (1956) 110–115, https://doi.org/ [103] M. De Marinis, F. Stocchi, B. Gregori, N. Accornero, Sympathetic skin response
10.1001/archderm.1956.01550020010002. and cardiovascular autonomic function tests in Parkinson’s disease and multiple
[78] K. Harada, M. Saito, T. Sugita, R. Tsuboi, Malassezia species and their associated system atrophy with autonomic failure, Mov. Disord. 15 (2000) 1215–1220,
skin diseases, J. Dermatol. 42 (2015) 250–257, https://doi.org/10.1111/1346- https://doi.org/10.1002/1531-8257(200011)15:6<1215::aid-mds1023>3.0.co;
8138.12700. 2-j.
[79] H. Braak, K. del Tredici, Non-dopaminergic pathology of Parkinson’s disease, in: [104] P. Schestatsky, J. Valls-Sol´e, J.A. Ehlers, C.R.M. Rieder, I. Gomes, Hyperhidrosis
Park. Dis. Non-motor Non-dopaminergic Featur, Blackwell Publishing Ltd., in Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 21 (2006) 1744–1748, https://doi.org/
Oxford, UK, 2011, pp. 15–31, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444397970.ch3. 10.1002/mds.21006.
[80] N. Zander, R. Sommer, I. Scha¨fer, R. Reinert, N. Kirsten, B.C. Zyriax, J.T. Maul, [105] V. S ˇ pica, T. Pekmezovi´c, M. Svetel, V.S. Kosti´c, Prevalence of non-motor
M. Augustin, Epidemiology and dermatological comorbidity of seborrhoeic symptoms in young-onset versus late-onset Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 260
dermatitis: population-based study in 161 269 employees, Br. J. Dermatol. 181 (2013) 131–137, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-012-6600-9.
(2019) 743–748, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.17826.

Chunk 56:
 Pekmezovi´c, M. Svetel, V.S. Kosti´c, Prevalence of non-motor
M. Augustin, Epidemiology and dermatological comorbidity of seborrhoeic symptoms in young-onset versus late-onset Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 260
dermatitis: population-based study in 161 269 employees, Br. J. Dermatol. 181 (2013) 131–137, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-012-6600-9.
(2019) 743–748, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.17826. [106] Y. Iwasa, I. Saito, C. Fujii, Investigation of the treatment and living assistance
[81] M. Laurence, J. Benito-Leo´n, F. Calon, Malassezia and Parkinson’s disease, Front. needed by patients with young-onset Parkinson’s disease, Kobe J. Med. Sci. 64
Neurol. 10 (2019) 758, https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2019.00758. (2018) E180–E188.
[82] M. Mastrolonardo, A. Diaferio, G. Logroscino, Seborrheic dermatitis, increased [107] T. Witjas, E. Kaphan, J.P. Azulay, O. Blin, M. Ceccaldi, J. Pouget, M. Poncet, A. Ali
sebum excretion, and Parkinson’s disease: a survey of (im)possible links, Med. Ch´erif, Nonmotor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease: frequent and disabling,
Hypotheses 60 (2003) 907–911, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0306-9877(03)00094- Neurology 59 (2002) 408–413, https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.59.3.408.
x. [108] E. De Pablo-Fernandez, C. Tur, T. Revesz, A.J. Lees, J.L. Holton, T.T. Warner,
[83] H. Sariahmetoglu, A. Soysal, A. Sen, B. Yuksel, S. Celiker, B. Ciftci-Kavaklioglu, Association of autonomic dysfunction with disease progression and survival in
B. Arpaci, Forehead sympathetic skin responses in determining autonomic Parkinson disease, JAMA Neurol 74 (2017) 970–976, https://doi.org/10.1001/
involvement in Parkinson’s disease, Clin. Neurophysiol. 125 (2014) 2436–2440, jamaneurol.2017.1125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2014.03.024. [109] H. Saito, K. Kogure, Thermal sudomotor deficits in Parkinson’s disease, Clin.
Neurol. 29 (6) (1989) 734–740.
72

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[110] J.I.

Chunk 57:
oi.org/10.1001/
involvement in Parkinson’s disease, Clin. Neurophysiol. 125 (2014) 2436–2440, jamaneurol.2017.1125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2014.03.024. [109] H. Saito, K. Kogure, Thermal sudomotor deficits in Parkinson’s disease, Clin.
Neurol. 29 (6) (1989) 734–740.
72

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[110] J.I. Sage, M.H. Mark, Drenching sweats as an off phenomenon in Parkinson’s nonmotor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease, Park. Relat. Disord. 18 (2012)
disease: treatment and relation to plasma levodopa profile, Ann. Neurol. 37 994–997, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.05.011.
(1995) 120–122, https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410370124. [131] S. Lam, J.P. Langevin, D. Malkasian, A. Gorgulho, A. DeSalles, Deep brain
[111] L. Swinn, A. Schrag, R. Viswanathan, B.R. Bloem, A. Lees, N. Quinn, Sweating stimulator-induced diaphoresis in Parkinson’s disease patients, J. Clin. Neurosci.
dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 18 (2003) 1459–1463, https:// 21 (2014) 676–678, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2013.07.012.
doi.org/10.1002/mds.10586. [132] A. Ramirez-Zamora, H. Smith, Y. Youn, J. Durphy, D.S. Shin, J.G. Pilitsis,
[112] R. Ou, X. Guo, W. Song, B. Cao, Q. Wei, N. Shao, B. Zhao, H. Shang, Hyperhidrosis associated with subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s
Characteristics of non-motor symptoms in patients with Parkinson’s disease disease: insights into central autonomic functional anatomy, J. Neurol. Sci. 366
exhibiting camptocormia, Gait Posture 40 (2014) 447–450, https://doi.org/ (2016) 59–64, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2016.04.045.
10.1016/j.gaitpost.2014.05.011. [133] A. Lipp, J. Tank, T. Trottenberg, A. Kupsch, G. Arnold, J. Jordan, Sympathetic
[113] S. Prasad, A. Lenka, A. Stezin, R.M. Naduthota, M. Jha, R. Yadav, P.K. Pal, activation due to deep brain stimulation in the region of the STN, Neurology 65
A comparative study of early and late onset freezi

Chunk 58:
ps://doi.org/ (2016) 59–64, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2016.04.045.
10.1016/j.gaitpost.2014.05.011. [133] A. Lipp, J. Tank, T. Trottenberg, A. Kupsch, G. Arnold, J. Jordan, Sympathetic
[113] S. Prasad, A. Lenka, A. Stezin, R.M. Naduthota, M. Jha, R. Yadav, P.K. Pal, activation due to deep brain stimulation in the region of the STN, Neurology 65
A comparative study of early and late onset freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease, (2005) 774–775, https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000174436.36399.ca.
Ann. Indian Acad. Neurol. 21 (2018) 256–262, https://doi.org/10.4103/aian. [134] C. Yang, Y. Qiu, X. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Hu, Analysis of contact position for
AIAN_459_17. subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation-induced hyperhidrosis, Parkinsons.
[114] K. Kimpinski, V. Iodice, D.D. Burton, M. Camilleri, B.P. Mullan, A. Lipp, Dis. 2019 (2019) 8180123, https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/8180123.
P. Sandroni, T.L. Gehrking, D.M. Sletten, J.E. Ahlskog, R.D. Fealey, W. Singer, P. [135] S. Egami, J. Yamagami, M. Amagai, Autoimmune bullous skin diseases,
A. Low, The role of autonomic testing in the differentiation of Parkinson’s disease pemphigus and pemphigoid, J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 145 (2020) 1031–1047,
from multiple system atrophy, J. Neurol. Sci. 317 (2012) 92–96, https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2020.02.013.
10.1016/j.jns.2012.02.023. [136] Y.C. Lai, Y.W. Yew, W.C. Lambert, Bullous pemphigoid and its association with
[115] A. Lipp, P. Sandroni, J.E. Ahlskog, R.D. Fealey, K. Kimpinski, V. Iodice, T. neurological diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Eur. Acad.
L. Gehrking, S.D. Weigand, D.M. Sletten, J.A. Gehrking, K.K. Nickander, Dermatol. Venereol. 30 (2016) 2007–2015, https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.13660.
W. Singer, D.M. Maraganore, S. Gilman, G.K. Wenning, C.W. Shults, P.A. Low, [137] P. Bernard, F. Antonicelli, Bullous pemphigoid: a review of its diagnosis,
Prospective differentiation of multiple system atrophy from Parkinson disease, associa

Chunk 59:
r. Acad.
L. Gehrking, S.D. Weigand, D.M. Sletten, J.A. Gehrking, K.K. Nickander, Dermatol. Venereol. 30 (2016) 2007–2015, https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.13660.
W. Singer, D.M. Maraganore, S. Gilman, G.K. Wenning, C.W. Shults, P.A. Low, [137] P. Bernard, F. Antonicelli, Bullous pemphigoid: a review of its diagnosis,
Prospective differentiation of multiple system atrophy from Parkinson disease, associations and treatment, Am. J. Clin. Dermatol. 18 (2017) 513–528, https://
with and without autonomic failure, Arch. Neurol. 66 (2009) 742–750, https:// doi.org/10.1007/s40257-017-0264-2.
doi.org/10.1001/archneurol.2009.71. [138] Y.J. Chen, C.Y. Wu, M.W. Lin, T.J. Chen, K.K. Liao, Y.C. Chen, C.Y. Hwang, S.
[116] L. Brun, R. Lefaucheur, D. Fetter, S. Derrey, A. Borden, D. Wallon, B. Bourre, Y. Chu, C.C. Chen, D.D. Lee, Y.T. Chang, W.J. Wang, H.N. Liu, Comorbidity
D. Maltˆete, Non-motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease: prevalence, profiles among patients with bullous pemphigoid: a nationwide population-based
characteristics and management in a large cohort of parkinsonian outpatients, study, Br. J. Dermatol. 165 (2011) 593–599, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 127 (2014) 93–96, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 2133.2011.10386.x.
clineuro.2014.10.006. [139] P. Bartkiewicz, J. Gornowicz-Porowska, P.P. Pietkiewicz, A. Swirkowicz,
[117] A. Storch, C.B. Schneider, M. Wolz, Y. Stürwald, A. Nebe, P. Odin, A. Mahler, M. Bowszyc-Dmochowska, M. Dmochowski, Neurodegenerative disorders,
G. Fuchs, W.H. Jost, K.R. Chaudhuri, R. Koch, H. Reichmann, G. Ebersbach, bullous pemphigoid and psoriasis: a comparative study in ethnic Poles indicates
Nonmotor fluctuations in Parkinson disease: severity and correlation with motor that Parkinson’s disease is more relevant to bullous pemphigoid, Postep.
complications, Neurology 80 (2013) 800–809, https://doi.org/10.1212/ Dermatologii i Alergol. 34 (2017) 42–46, https://doi.org/10.5114/
WNL.0b013e318285c0ed. ada.2017.65619.
[118] S. Ja

Chunk 60:
d and psoriasis: a comparative study in ethnic Poles indicates
Nonmotor fluctuations in Parkinson disease: severity and correlation with motor that Parkinson’s disease is more relevant to bullous pemphigoid, Postep.
complications, Neurology 80 (2013) 800–809, https://doi.org/10.1212/ Dermatologii i Alergol. 34 (2017) 42–46, https://doi.org/10.5114/
WNL.0b013e318285c0ed. ada.2017.65619.
[118] S. Jain, Multi-organ autonomic dysfunction in Parkinson disease, Park. Relat. [140] A. Kalinska-Bienias, E. Kowalczyk, P. Jagielski, P. Bienias, C. Kowalewski,
Disord. 17 (2011) 77–83, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.08.022. K. Wo´zniak, The association between neurological diseases, malignancies and
[119] K. Seppi, K. Ray Chaudhuri, M. Coelho, S.H. Fox, R. Katzenschlager, S. Perez cardiovascular comorbidities among patients with bullous pemphigoid: case-
Lloret, D. Weintraub, C. Sampaio, The collaborators of the Parkinson’s disease control study in a specialized Polish center, Adv. Clin. Exp. Med. 28 (2019)
update on non-motor symptoms study group on behalf of the movement disorders 637–642, https://doi.org/10.17219/acem/90922.
society evidence-based medicine committee, update on treatments for nonmotor [141] S. Khosravani, F. Handjani, R. Alimohammadi, N. Saki, Frequency of neurological
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease-an evidence-based medicine review, Mov. disorders in bullous pemphigoid patients: a cross-sectional study, Int. Sch. Res.
Disord. 34 (2019) 180–198, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27602. Not. (2017) 1–4, https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6053267.
[120] J. Dutkiewicz, S. Szlufik, A. Friedman, New methods of assessing autonomic [142] L. Kibsgaard, M. Rasmussen, A. Lamberg, M. Deleuran, A.B. Olesen,
disorders in Parkinson disease patients: skin-galvanic reaction, J. Neural. Transm. C. Vestergaard, Increased frequency of multiple sclerosis among patients with
126 (2019) 1421–1424, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-019-02060-6. bullous pemphigoid: a population-based co

Chunk 61:
. Szlufik, A. Friedman, New methods of assessing autonomic [142] L. Kibsgaard, M. Rasmussen, A. Lamberg, M. Deleuran, A.B. Olesen,
disorders in Parkinson disease patients: skin-galvanic reaction, J. Neural. Transm. C. Vestergaard, Increased frequency of multiple sclerosis among patients with
126 (2019) 1421–1424, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-019-02060-6. bullous pemphigoid: a population-based cohort study on comorbidities anchored
[121] O.S. Levin, A.K. Ivanov, N.N. Shyndryaeva, Treatment of non-motor fluctuations around the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid, Br. J. Dermatol. 176 (2017)
with combined drug stalevo in patients with Parkinson’s disease, Zhurnal Nevrol. 1486–1491, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.15405.
i Psihiatr. Im. S.S. Korsakova. 111 (2011) 38–42. [143] Z. Kwan, Y.N. Lai, C.C. Ch’Ng, A.H. Tan, L.L. Tan, S. Robinson, R. Ismail, The
[122] P. Martinez-Martin, P. Reddy, A. Antonini, T. Henriksen, R. Katzenschlager, association between bullous pemphigoid and neurological disorders in a selected
P. Odin, A. Todorova, Y. Naidu, S. Tluk, C. Chandiramani, A. Martin, K. Malaysian population, Med. J. Malaysia 70 (2015) 81–85.
R. Chaudhuri, Chronic subcutaneous infusion therapy with apomorphine in [144] S.M. Langan, R.W. Groves, J. West, The relationship between neurological disease
advanced Parkinson’s disease compared to conventional therapy: a real life study and bullous pemphigoid: a population-based case-control study, J. Invest.
of non motor effect, J. Parkinsons Dis. 1 (2011) 197–203, https://doi.org/ Dermatol. 131 (2011) 631–636, https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2010.357.
10.3233/JPD-2011-11037. [145] K.N. Messingham, A.D. Miller, N.S. Narayanan, S.J. Connell, J.A. Fairley,
[123] V. Pursiainen, J. Lyytinen, E. Pekkonen, Effect of duodenal levodopa infusion on Demographics and autoantibody profiles of pemphigoid patients with underlying
blood pressure and sweating, Acta Neurol. Scand. 126 (2012) e20–e24, https:// neurologic diseases, J. Invest. Dermatol. 139 (201

Chunk 62:
7.
10.3233/JPD-2011-11037. [145] K.N. Messingham, A.D. Miller, N.S. Narayanan, S.J. Connell, J.A. Fairley,
[123] V. Pursiainen, J. Lyytinen, E. Pekkonen, Effect of duodenal levodopa infusion on Demographics and autoantibody profiles of pemphigoid patients with underlying
blood pressure and sweating, Acta Neurol. Scand. 126 (2012) e20–e24, https:// neurologic diseases, J. Invest. Dermatol. 139 (2019) 1860–1866.e1, https://doi.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404.2012.01648.x. org/10.1016/j.jid.2019.01.034.
[124] M. Naumann, D. Dressler, M. Hallett, J. Jankovic, G. Schiavo, K.R. Segal, [146] E. Papakonstantinou, M.M. Limberg, M. Gehring, N. Kotnik, A. Kapp, B.F. Gibbs,
D. Truong, Evidence-based review and assessment of botulinum neurotoxin for U. Raap, Neurological disorders are associated with bullous pemphigoid, J. Eur.
the treatment of secretory disorders, Toxicon 67 (2013) 141–152, https://doi. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 33 (2019) 925–929, https://doi.org/10.1111/
org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.10.020. jdv.15444.
[125] M.K. Sanghera, C. Ward, R.M. Stewart, K. Mewes, R.K. Simpson, E.C. Lai, [147] C.Z.Y. Phuan, Y.W. Yew, H.L. Tey, Bullous pemphigoid and antecedent
Alleviation of drenching sweats following subthalamic deep brain stimulation in a neurological diseases: an association with dementia, Indian J. Dermatol.
patient with Parkinson’s disease - a case report, J. Neurol. Sci. 285 (2009) Venereol. Leprol. 83 (2017) 457–461, https://doi.org/10.4103/0378-
246–249, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2009.06.019. 6323.198451.
[126] T. Witjas, E. Kaphan, J. R´egis, E. Jouve, A.A. Ch´erif, J.C. P´eragut, J.P. Azulay, [148] Z. Ren, D.Y. Hsu, J. Brieva, N.B. Silverberg, S.M. Langan, J.I. Silverberg,
Effects of chronic subthalamic stimulation on nonmotor fluctuations in Hospitalization, inpatient burden and comorbidities associated with bullous
Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 22 (2007) 1729–1734, https://doi.org/ pemphigoid in the U.S.A, Br. J. Dermatol. 176 (2017) 87–99, https://doi.or

Chunk 63:
. P´eragut, J.P. Azulay, [148] Z. Ren, D.Y. Hsu, J. Brieva, N.B. Silverberg, S.M. Langan, J.I. Silverberg,
Effects of chronic subthalamic stimulation on nonmotor fluctuations in Hospitalization, inpatient burden and comorbidities associated with bullous
Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 22 (2007) 1729–1734, https://doi.org/ pemphigoid in the U.S.A, Br. J. Dermatol. 176 (2017) 87–99, https://doi.org/
10.1002/mds.21602. 10.1111/bjd.14821.
[127] A. Halim, L. Baumgartner, D.K. Binder, Effect of deep brain stimulation on [149] B. Sim, S. Fook-Chong, Y.W. Phoon, H.Y. Koh, T. Thirumoorthy, S.M. Pang, H.
autonomic dysfunction in patients with Parkinson’s disease, J. Clin. Neurosci. 18 Y. Lee, Multimorbidity in bullous pemphigoid: a case–control analysis of bullous
(2011) 804–806, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2010.10.015. pemphigoid patients with age- and gender-matched controls, J. Eur. Acad.
[128] N. Hwynn, I. Ul Haq, I.A. Malaty, A.S. Resnick, Y. Dai, K.D. Foote, H. Dermatol. Venereol. 31 (2017) 1709–1714, https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.14312.
H. Fernandez, S.S. Wu, G. Oyama, C.E. Jacobson, S.K. Kim, M.S. Okun, Effect of [150] S. Bastuji-Garin, P. Joly, P. Lemordant, A. Sparsa, C. Bedane, E. Delaporte, J.
deep brain stimulation on Parkinson’s nonmotor symptoms following unilateral C. Roujeau, P. Bernard, J.C. Guillaume, S. Ingen-Housz-Oro, H. Maillard,
DBS: a pilot study, Parkinsons. Dis. 2011 (2011), 507416, https://doi.org/ C. Pauwels, C. Picard-Dahan, Y. Dutronc, M.A. Richard, Risk factors for bullous
10.4061/2011/507416. pemphigoid in the elderly: A prospective case-control study, J. Invest. Dermatol.
[129] M. Kawaguchi, K. Samura, Y. Miyagi, T. Okamoto, R. Yamasaki, N. Sakae, 131 (2011) 637–643, https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2010.301.
F. Yoshida, K. Iihara, The effects of chronic subthalamic stimulation on nonmotor [151] K. Taghipour, C.C. Chi, A. Vincent, R.W. Groves, V. Venning, F. Wojnarowska,
symptoms in advanced Parkinson’s disease, revealed by an online questionna

Chunk 64:
udy, J. Invest. Dermatol.
[129] M. Kawaguchi, K. Samura, Y. Miyagi, T. Okamoto, R. Yamasaki, N. Sakae, 131 (2011) 637–643, https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2010.301.
F. Yoshida, K. Iihara, The effects of chronic subthalamic stimulation on nonmotor [151] K. Taghipour, C.C. Chi, A. Vincent, R.W. Groves, V. Venning, F. Wojnarowska,
symptoms in advanced Parkinson’s disease, revealed by an online questionnaire The association of bullous pemphigoid with cerebrovascular disease and
program, Acta Neurochir. 162 (2020) 247–255, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00701- dementia: A case-control study, Arch. Dermatol. 146 (2010) 1251–1254, https://
019-04182-y. doi.org/10.1001/archdermatol.2010.322.
[130] M. Wolz, J. Hauschild, M. Fauser, L. Klingelho¨fer, H. Reichmann, A. Storch, [152] V.B. Teixeira, R. Cabral, M.M. Brites, R. Vieira, A. Figueiredo, Bullous pemphigoid
Immediate effects of deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus on and comorbidities: A case-control study in Portuguese patients, An. Bras.
73

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
Dermatol. 89 (2014) 274–278, https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806- [174] R.M.A. de Bie, C.E. Clarke, A.J. Espay, S.H. Fox, A.E. Lang, Initiation of
4841.20142516. pharmacological therapy in Parkinson’s disease: when, why, and how, Lancet
[153] A. Kalinska-Bienias, K. Lukowska-Smorawska, P. Jagielski, C. Kowalewski, Neurol. 19 (2020) 452–461, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(20)30036-3.
K. Wozniak, Mortality in bullous pemphigoid and prognostic factors in 1st and [175] A. Bougea, N. Spantideas, A. Katoulis, L. Stefanis, Levodopa-induced skin
3rd year of follow-up in specialized centre in Poland, Arch, Dermatol. Res. 309 disorders in patients with Parkinson disease: a systematic literature review
(2017) 709–719, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-017-1772-x. approach, Acta Neurol. Belg. 119 (2019) 325–336, https://doi.org/10.1007/
[154] P. Pietkiewicz, J. Gornowicz-Porowska, M. B

Chunk 65:
 Spantideas, A. Katoulis, L. Stefanis, Levodopa-induced skin
3rd year of follow-up in specialized centre in Poland, Arch, Dermatol. Res. 309 disorders in patients with Parkinson disease: a systematic literature review
(2017) 709–719, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-017-1772-x. approach, Acta Neurol. Belg. 119 (2019) 325–336, https://doi.org/10.1007/
[154] P. Pietkiewicz, J. Gornowicz-Porowska, M. Bowszyc-Dmochowska, s13760-019-01195-3.
P. Bartkiewicz, M. Dmochowski, Bullous pemphigoid and neurodegenerative [176] K.L. Chou, M.A. Stacy, Skin rash associated with Sinemet does not equal levodopa
diseases: a study in a setting of a Central European university dermatology allergy, Neurology 68 (2007) 1078–1079, https://doi.org/10.1212/01.
department, Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 28 (2016) 659–663, https://doi.org/10.1007/ wnl.0000257823.27573.3d.
s40520-015-0459-4. [177] M.A. Cansino-Torres, V. Sandoval-Rodríguez, M. S´aenz-Farret, C. Zún˜iga-
[155] K.E. Brick, C.H. Weaver, R. Savica, C.M. Lohse, M.R. Pittelkow, B.F. Boeve, L. Ramírez, Allergy to Carbidopa, Clin. Neuropharmacol. 41 (2018) 75–79, https://
E. Gibson, M.J. Camilleri, C.N. Wieland, A population-based study of the doi.org/10.1097/WNF.0000000000000270.
association between bullous pemphigoid and neurologic disorders, J. Am. Acad. [178] G. Da Prat, M. Cesarini, J.L. Etcheverry, N.G. Rojas, E.M. Gatto, Skin Allergy
Dermatol. 71 (2014) 1191–1197, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2014.07.052. Associated to Different Formulations of Levodopa, Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 5
[156] S.C.S. Cai, J.C. Allen, Y.L. Lim, S.H. Chua, S.H. Tan, M.B.Y. Tang, Mortality of (2018) 657–658, https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12669.
bullous pemphigoid in Singapore: Risk factors and causes of death in 359 patients [179] A. Antonini, Apomorphine and Levodopa Infusion Therapies for Advanced
seen at the National Skin Centre, Br. J. Dermatol. 170 (2014) 1319–1326, https:// Parkinson’s Disease, J. Mov. Disord. 2 (2009) 4–9, https://doi.org/10.14802/
doi.org/1

Chunk 66:
Y. Tang, Mortality of (2018) 657–658, https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12669.
bullous pemphigoid in Singapore: Risk factors and causes of death in 359 patients [179] A. Antonini, Apomorphine and Levodopa Infusion Therapies for Advanced
seen at the National Skin Centre, Br. J. Dermatol. 170 (2014) 1319–1326, https:// Parkinson’s Disease, J. Mov. Disord. 2 (2009) 4–9, https://doi.org/10.14802/
doi.org/10.1111/bjd.12806. jmd.09002.
[157] E. Casas-De-La-Asuncio´n, J. Ruano-Ruiz, A.M. Rodríguez-Martín, A. V´elez García- [180] X.R. Zhang, Z.Y. Jiang, Z.R. Zhang, H.J. Chen, K. Wu, J.C. He, C.L. Xie, The
Nieto, J.C. Moreno-Gim´enez, Association Between Bullous Pemphigoid and advantages of Levodopa-Carbidopa intestinal gel for patients with advanced
Neurologic Diseases: A Case-Control Study, Actas Dermosifiliogr 105 (2014) Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review, Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 14 (2020)
860–865, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ad.2014.04.013. 845–854, https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S229621.
[158] N. Cordel, O. Chosidow, M.F. Hellot, E. Delaporte, C. Lok, L. Vaillant, P. Bernard, [181] M. Epstein, D.A. Johnson, R. Hawes, N. Schmulewitz, A.D. Vanagunas, E.
M. D’Incan, J.C. Roujeau, P. Joly, Neurological disorders in patients with bullous R. Gossen, W.Z. Robieson, S. Eaton, J. Dubow, K. Chatamra, J. Benesh, Long-Term
pemphigoid, Dermatology 215 (2007) 187–191, https://doi.org/10.1159/ PEG-J Tube Safety in Patients With Advanced Parkinson’s Disease, Clin. Transl.
000106574. Gastroenterol. 7 (2016) e159, https://doi.org/10.1038/ctg.2016.19.
[159] M. Daneshpazhooh, J. Khorassani, K. Balighi, N. Ghandi, H. Mahmoudi, [182] M. Udd, J. Lyytinen, J. Eerola-Rautio, A. Kentt¨amies, O. Lindstro¨m, L. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a,
H. Tohidinik, S. Hamzelou, C. Chams-Davatchi, Neurological diseases and bullous E. Pekkonen, Problems related to levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel treatment in
pemphigoid: A case-control study in Iranian patients, Indian J. Dermatol. advanced Parkinson’s disease, Brain Behav 7 (2017)

Chunk 67:
N. Ghandi, H. Mahmoudi, [182] M. Udd, J. Lyytinen, J. Eerola-Rautio, A. Kentt¨amies, O. Lindstro¨m, L. Kyl¨anp¨a¨a,
H. Tohidinik, S. Hamzelou, C. Chams-Davatchi, Neurological diseases and bullous E. Pekkonen, Problems related to levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel treatment in
pemphigoid: A case-control study in Iranian patients, Indian J. Dermatol. advanced Parkinson’s disease, Brain Behav 7 (2017), e00737, https://doi.org/
Venereol. Leprol. 83 (2017) 195–199, https://doi.org/10.4103/0378- 10.1002/brb3.737.
6323.191132. [183] C.W. Olanow, K. Kieburtz, P. Odin, A.J. Espay, D.G. Standaert, H.H. Fernandez,
[160] T. Gambichler, H. Segert, S. Ho¨xtermann, L. Schmitz, P. Altmeyer, B. Teegen, A. Vanagunas, A.A. Othman, K.L. Widnell, W.Z. Robieson, Y. Pritchett,
Neurological disorders in patients with bullous pemphigoid: Clinical and K. Chatamra, J. Benesh, R.A. Lenz, A. Antonini, Continuous intrajejunal infusion
experimental investigations, J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 29 (2015) of levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel for patients with advanced Parkinson’s
1758–1762, https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.12995. disease: A randomised, controlled, double-blind, double-dummy study, Lancet
[161] H.W. Jeon, S.J. Yun, S.C. Lee, Y.H. Won, J.B. Lee, Mortality and comorbidity Neurol. 13 (2014) 141–149, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70293-X.
profiles of patients with bullous pemphigoid in Korea, Ann. Dermatol. 30 (2018) [184] D. Devos, Y. Agid, A. Al Khedr, A. Annic, J.P. Azulay, S. Bakchine, G. Barroche,
13–19, https://doi.org/10.5021/ad.2018.30.1.13. C. Bayreuter, T. Benoit, B. Billaud, B. Bonnefoi, A.M. Bonnet, M. Borg, C. Brefel-
[162] M.D. Sweeney, A.P. Sagare, B. V Zlokovic, Blood-brain barrier breakdown in Courbon, J.P. Brandel, E. Broussolle, P. Busson, S. Cantiniaux, P. C´esaro, J.
Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14 C. Corvol, M. Coustans, P. Damier, C. Danisi, R. Decombe, L. Defebvre,
(2018) 133–150, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneuro

Chunk 68:
 Bonnefoi, A.M. Bonnet, M. Borg, C. Brefel-
[162] M.D. Sweeney, A.P. Sagare, B. V Zlokovic, Blood-brain barrier breakdown in Courbon, J.P. Brandel, E. Broussolle, P. Busson, S. Cantiniaux, P. C´esaro, J.
Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14 C. Corvol, M. Coustans, P. Damier, C. Danisi, R. Decombe, L. Defebvre,
(2018) 133–150, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneurol.2017.188. P. Derkinderen, A. Dest´ee, A. Doedemaindreville, S. Drapier, D. Dupuy,
[163] V. Di Lernia, D.M. Casanova, M. Goldust, C. Ricci, Pemphigus Vulgaris and G. F´enelon, D. Gayraud, P. G´erard, O. Godefroy, E. Godet, D. Grabli, P. Gros, J.
Bullous Pemphigoid: Update on Diagnosis and Treatment, Dermatol. Pract. L. Houeto, A. Kreisler, P. Krystkowiak, F. Lallement, F. Madigand, V. Mesnage,
Concept. 10 (2020), https://doi.org/10.5826/DPC.1003A50. C. Moreau, L. Nahum-Moscovici, F. Ory-Magnier, O. Rascol, P. Remy, L. Reni´e,
[164] R.L. Gallo, R.D. Granstein, S. Kang, M. Mannis, M. Steinhoff, J. Tan, D. Thiboutot, D. Seguy, J.M. Senard, S. Thobois, C. Tranchant, M. V´erin, F. Viallet, M. Vidailhet,
Standard classification and pathophysiology of rosacea: The 2017 update by the M. Wagner, T. Witjas, J. Xie, F. Zagnoli, M. Ziegler, Patient profile, indications,
National Rosacea Society Expert Committee, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 78 (2018) efficacy and safety of duodenal levodopa infusion in advanced Parkinson’s
148–155, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2017.08.037. disease, Mov. Disord. 24 (2009) 993–1000, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.22450.
[165] A. Egeberg, P.R. Hansen, G.H. Gislason, J.P. Thyssen, Exploring the Association [185] L. Lopiano, N. Modugno, P. Marano, M. Sensi, G. Meco, P. Solla, G. Gusmaroli,
Between Rosacea and Parkinson Disease: A Danish Nationwide Cohort Study, F. Tamma, F. Mancini, R. Quatrale, R. Zangaglia, A. Bentivoglio, R. Eleopra,
JAMA Neurol 73 (2016) 529–534, https://doi.org/10.1001/ G. Gualberti, G. Melzi, A. Antonini, Motor and non-motor outcomes in pat

Chunk 69:
P. Thyssen, Exploring the Association [185] L. Lopiano, N. Modugno, P. Marano, M. Sensi, G. Meco, P. Solla, G. Gusmaroli,
Between Rosacea and Parkinson Disease: A Danish Nationwide Cohort Study, F. Tamma, F. Mancini, R. Quatrale, R. Zangaglia, A. Bentivoglio, R. Eleopra,
JAMA Neurol 73 (2016) 529–534, https://doi.org/10.1001/ G. Gualberti, G. Melzi, A. Antonini, Motor and non-motor outcomes in patients
jamaneurol.2016.0022. with advanced Parkinson’s disease treated with levodopa/carbidopa intestinal
[166] R.J. Mathieu, N. Guido, E. Ibler, L. Serrano, S.M. Rangel, B.J. Schlosser, D.P. West, gel: final results of the GREENFIELD observational study, J. Neurol. 266 (2019)
A.E. Laumann, B. Nardone, Rosacea and subsequent diagnosis for Parkinson’s 2164–2176, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-019-09337-6.
disease: a large, urban, single center, US patient population retrospective study, [186] M. Burack, J. Aldred, C. Zadikoff, A. Vanagunas, K. Klos, B. Bilir, H.H. Fernandez,
J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 32 (2018) e141–e144, https://doi.org/ D.G. Standaert, Implementing Levodopa-Carbidopa Intestinal Gel for Parkinson
10.1111/jdv.14638. Disease: Insights from US Practitioners, Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 5 (2018)
[167] A. Alexoudi, I. Alexoudi, S. Gatzonis, Association Between Rosacea and Parkinson 383–393, https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12630.
Disease, JAMA Neurol 73 (2016) 1159, https://doi.org/10.1001/ [187] M. Facheris, X. Qi, C. Locke, M. Rosebraugh, J. Benesh, Lack of Notable Skin
jamaneurol.2016.2321. Reactions from a Novel Levodopa/Carbidopa Prodrug after 10 Days of Repeated
[168] D. Thiboutot, R. Anderson, F. Cook-Bolden, Z. Draelos, R.L. Gallo, R.D. Granstein, 24-Hour Continuous Subcutaneous Infusion at the Same Administration Site
S. Kang, M. Macsai, L.S. Gold, J. Tan, Standard management options for rosacea: [abstract], Mov. Disord. 34 (2019).
The 2019 update by the National Rosacea Society Expert Committee, J. Am. Acad. [188] M. Rosebraugh, P. Kym, W. Liu, M. Fach

Chunk 70:
168] D. Thiboutot, R. Anderson, F. Cook-Bolden, Z. Draelos, R.L. Gallo, R.D. Granstein, 24-Hour Continuous Subcutaneous Infusion at the Same Administration Site
S. Kang, M. Macsai, L.S. Gold, J. Tan, Standard management options for rosacea: [abstract], Mov. Disord. 34 (2019).
The 2019 update by the National Rosacea Society Expert Committee, J. Am. Acad. [188] M. Rosebraugh, P. Kym, W. Liu, M. Facheris, ABBV-951 Maintains Stable
Dermatol. 82 (2020) 1501–1510, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2020.01.077. Levodopa Exposure following Subcutaneous Infusion in Parkinson’s Disease
[169] D.J. van Wamelen, V. Leta, J. Johnson, C.L. Ocampo, A.M. Podlewska, Patients (543), Neurology 94 (15) (2020).
K. Rukavina, A. Rizos, P. Martinez-Martin, K.R. Chaudhuri, Drooling in [189] M. Facheris, S. Criswell, N. Pavasia, R. Pahwa, C. Locke, W. Robieson,
Parkinson’s Disease: Prevalence and Progression from the Non-motor D. Shprecher, Safety and Tolerability During a 4-Week Continuous Subcutaneous
International Longitudinal Study, Dysphagia (2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/ Infusion of ABBV-951, a New Drug Formulation for the Treatment of Parkinson’s
s00455-020-10102-5. Disease: Final Results of a Phase 1b Study (1384), Neurology 94 (15) (2020).
[170] B.R. Bloem, J.G. Kalf, P.C.M. Van De Kerkhof, M.J. Zwarts, Debilitating [190] L. Adar, T.R. Minei, Y. Cohen, S. Oren, Continuous Administration of
consequences of drooling, J. Neurol. 256 (2009) 1382–1383, https://doi.org/ Subcutaneous Levodopa/Carbidopa (ND0612) Demonstrated Comparable
10.1007/s00415-009-5144-0. Levodopa Pharmacokinetics to Levodopa/Carbidopa Intestinal Gel (LCIG)
[171] T.A. Mestre, E. Freitas, A. Basndwah, M.R. Lopez, L.M. de Oliveira, D.M. Al- (S4.003), Neurology 88 (16) (2017).
Shorafat, T. Zhang, J. Lui, D. Grimes, S.H. Fox, Glycopyrrolate Improves Disability [191] S. Isaacson, W. Poewe, T. Simuni, S. Oren, R. Case, C.W. Olanow, First Results for
from Sialorrhea in Parkinson’s Disease: A 12-Week Controlled Trial, Mov. Dis

Chunk 71:
Carbidopa Intestinal Gel (LCIG)
[171] T.A. Mestre, E. Freitas, A. Basndwah, M.R. Lopez, L.M. de Oliveira, D.M. Al- (S4.003), Neurology 88 (16) (2017).
Shorafat, T. Zhang, J. Lui, D. Grimes, S.H. Fox, Glycopyrrolate Improves Disability [191] S. Isaacson, W. Poewe, T. Simuni, S. Oren, R. Case, C.W. Olanow, First Results for
from Sialorrhea in Parkinson’s Disease: A 12-Week Controlled Trial, Mov. Disord. The BeyoND Study: An open-label international, multicenter study evaluating the
(2020) 28196, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28196. long-term safety of ND0612 in patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease
[172] S.H. Isaacson, W. Ondo, C.E. Jackson, R.M. Trosch, E. Molho, F. Pagan, M. Lew, (4444), Neurology 94 (15) (2020).
K. Dashtipour, T. Clinch, A.J. Espay, Safety and Efficacy of RimabotulinumtoxinB [192] A. Ellenbogen, F. Stocchi, A. Espay, W. Poewe, S. Oren, R. Case, C.W. Olanow,
for Treatment of Sialorrhea in Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial, JAMA Neurol Impact of Subcutaneous Levodopa Infusion with ND0612 on Patient Reported
77 (2020) 461–469, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.4565. Outcomes (4506), Neurology 94 (15) (2020).
[173] D. Kulshreshtha, J. Ganguly, M. Jog, Managing autonomic dysfunction in [193] N. Prakash, K. McFarthing, T. Simuni, Clinical Trial Highlights-Infusion
Parkinson’s disease: a review of emerging drugs, Expet Opin. Emerg. Drugs 25 Therapies, J. Parkinsons Dis. 10 (2020) 5–17, https://doi.org/10.3233/JPD-
(2020) 37–47, https://doi.org/10.1080/14728214.2020.1729120. 199005.
74

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[194] S. Perez-Lloret, O. Rascol, Efficacy and safety of amantadine for the treatment of l- [220] K.M. Acland, A. Churchyard, C.L. Fletcher, K. Turner, A. Lees, P.M. Dowd,
DOPA-induced dyskinesia, J. Neural. Transm. 125 (2018) 1237–1250, https:// Panniculitis in association with apomorphine infusion, Br. J. Dermatol. 138
doi.org/10.1007/s00702-018-1869-1

Chunk 72:
 R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[194] S. Perez-Lloret, O. Rascol, Efficacy and safety of amantadine for the treatment of l- [220] K.M. Acland, A. Churchyard, C.L. Fletcher, K. Turner, A. Lees, P.M. Dowd,
DOPA-induced dyskinesia, J. Neural. Transm. 125 (2018) 1237–1250, https:// Panniculitis in association with apomorphine infusion, Br. J. Dermatol. 138
doi.org/10.1007/s00702-018-1869-1. (1998) 480–482, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2133.1998.02128.x.
[195] A.Q. Rana, M.S. Masroor, Patient perception of levido reticularis due to [221] J. Ganesalingam, P. Bain, Apomorphine-induced necrotic ulcers, Mov. Disord. 26
amantadine, Int. J. Neurosci. 122 (2012) 363–366, https://doi.org/10.3109/ (2011) 2182, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.23832.
00207454.2012.668727. [222] L. Wojtecki, M. Südmeyer, A. Schnitzler, Multiple subcutaneous abscesses and
[196] D.I. Vollum, J.D. Parkes, D. Doyle, Livedo reticularis during amantadine necroses due to apomorphine pump treatment, Park. Relat. Disord. 18 (2012)
treatment, Br. Med. J. 2 (1971) 627–628, https://doi.org/10.1136/ 1002, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.04.012.
bmj.2.5762.627. [223] A. Antonini, I.U. Isaias, G. Rodolfi, A. Landi, F. Natuzzi, C. Siri, G. Pezzoli, A 5-
[197] M.B. Gibbs, J.C. English, M.J. Zirwas, Livedo reticularis: An update, J. Am. Acad. year prospective assessment of advanced Parkinson disease patients treated with
Dermatol. 52 (2005) 1009–1019, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2004.11.051. subcutaneous apomorphine infusion or deep brain stimulation, J. Neurol. 258
[198] M. Kraemer, D. Linden, P. Berlit, The spectrum of differential diagnosis in (2011) 579–585, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-010-5793-z.
neurological patients with livedo reticularis and livedo racemosa A literature [224] A. Querejeta-Coma, C. Feliz-Feliz, J. Del Val, J. S´anchez-García, J. Fortes-Alen,
review, J. Neurol. 252 (2005) 1155–1166, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-005- P. Garcia-Ruiz, Severe abdominal panniculitis in a

Chunk 73:
it, The spectrum of differential diagnosis in (2011) 579–585, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-010-5793-z.
neurological patients with livedo reticularis and livedo racemosa A literature [224] A. Querejeta-Coma, C. Feliz-Feliz, J. Del Val, J. S´anchez-García, J. Fortes-Alen,
review, J. Neurol. 252 (2005) 1155–1166, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-005- P. Garcia-Ruiz, Severe abdominal panniculitis in a patient treated with
0967-9. continuous subcutaneous apomorphine infusion, Park. Relat. Disord. 65 (2019)
[199] L.M. Shulman, A. Minagar, K. Sharma, W.J. Weiner, Amantadine-induced 279–281, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.06.011.
peripheral neuropathy, Neurology 53 (1999) 1862, https://doi.org/10.1212/ [225] C. Trenkwalder, K.R. Chaudhuri, P.J. García Ruiz, P. LeWitt, R. Katzenschlager,
WNL.53.8.1862. F. Sixel-Do¨ring, T. Henriksen, A ´ . Sesar, W. Poewe, M. Baker, A. Ceballos-
[200] C.N. Shealy, J.B. Weeth, D. Mercier, Livedo Reticularis in Patients With Baumann, Deuschl Günther, S. Drapier, G. Ebersbach, A. Evans, H. Fernandez,
Parkinsonism Receiving Amantadine, JAMA, J. Am. Med. Assoc. 212 (1970) S. Isaacson, T. van Laar, A. Lees, S. Lewis, J.C.M. Castrillo, P. Martinez-Martin,
1522–1523, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1970.03170220076019. P. Odin, J. O’Sullivan, G. Tagaris, K. Wenzel, Expert Consensus Group report on
[201] M. Sanford, L.J. Scott, Rotigotine transdermal patch: A review of its use in the the use of apomorphine in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease - Clinical practice
treatment of parkinsons disease, CNS Drugs 25 (2011) 699–719, https://doi.org/ recommendations, Park. Relat. Disord. 21 (2015) 1023–1030, https://doi.org/
10.2165/11206750-000000000-00000. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.06.012.
[202] R.G. Holloway, Pramipexole vs levodopa as initial treatment for Parkinson [226] L. Poltawski, H. Edwards, A. Todd, T. Watson, A. Lees, C.A. James, Ultrasound
Disease: A 4-year randomized controlled trial, Arch. Neurol. 61 (2004) treatment of cutaneous side-

Chunk 74:
ndations, Park. Relat. Disord. 21 (2015) 1023–1030, https://doi.org/
10.2165/11206750-000000000-00000. 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.06.012.
[202] R.G. Holloway, Pramipexole vs levodopa as initial treatment for Parkinson [226] L. Poltawski, H. Edwards, A. Todd, T. Watson, A. Lees, C.A. James, Ultrasound
Disease: A 4-year randomized controlled trial, Arch. Neurol. 61 (2004) treatment of cutaneous side-effects of infused apomorphine: A randomized
1044–1053, https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.61.7.1044. controlled pilot study, Mov. Disord. 24 (2009) 115–118, https://doi.org/
[203] R.A. Hauser, A.H.V. Schapira, P. Barone, Y. Mizuno, O. Rascol, M. Busse, 10.1002/mds.22316.
C. Debieuvre, M. Fraessdorf, W. Poewe, Long-term safety and sustained efficacy of [227] C.W. Olanow, S.A. Factor, A.J. Espay, R.A. Hauser, H.A. Shill, S. Isaacson,
extended-release pramipexole in early and advanced Parkinson’s disease, Eur. J. R. Pahwa, M. Leinonen, P. Bhargava, K. Sciarappa, B. Navia, D. Blum, CTH-300
Neurol. 21 (2014) 736–743, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.12375. Study investigators, Apomorphine sublingual film for off episodes in Parkinson’s
[204] R.A. Hauser, H. Reichmann, M. Lew, A. Asgharian, C. Makumi, K.J. Shulman, disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study, Lancet
Long-term, open-label study of once-daily ropinirole prolonged release in early Neurol. 19 (2020) 135–144, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30396-5.
parkinson’s disease, Int. J. Neurosci. 121 (2011) 246–253, https://doi.org/ [228] M.S. Okun, Deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 367
10.3109/00207454.2010.546538. (2012) 1529–1538, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMct1208070.
[205] G. Kleiner-Fisman, D.N. Fisman, Risk factors for the development of pedal edema [229] J.F. Baizabal Carvallo, R. Simpson, J. Jankovic, Diagnosis and treatment of
in patients using pramipexole, Arch. Neurol. 64 (2007) 820–824, https://doi.org/ complications related to deep brain stimulation hardwar

Chunk 75:
Med. 367
10.3109/00207454.2010.546538. (2012) 1529–1538, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMct1208070.
[205] G. Kleiner-Fisman, D.N. Fisman, Risk factors for the development of pedal edema [229] J.F. Baizabal Carvallo, R. Simpson, J. Jankovic, Diagnosis and treatment of
in patients using pramipexole, Arch. Neurol. 64 (2007) 820–824, https://doi.org/ complications related to deep brain stimulation hardware, Mov. Disord. 26
10.1001/archneur.64.6.noc60158. (2011) 1398–1406, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.23800.
[206] E.K. Tan, W. Ondo, Clinical characteristics of pramipexole-induced peripheral [230] O. Jitkritsadakul, R. Bhidayasiri, S.K. Kalia, M. Hodaie, A.M. Lozano, A. Fasano,
edema, Arch. Neurol. 57 (2000) 729–732, https://doi.org/10.1001/ Systematic review of hardware-related complications of Deep Brain Stimulation:
archneur.57.5.729. Do new indications pose an increased risk? Brain Stimul 10 (2017) 967–976,
[207] J.A. Borovac, Side effects of a dopamine agonist therapy for Parkinson’s disease: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2017.07.003.
A mini-review of clinical pharmacology, Yale J. Biol. Med. 89 (2016) 37–47. [231] T.J. Atchley, N.M.B. Laskay, B.A. Sherrod, A.K.M.F. Rahman, H.C. Walker, B.
[208] T. Eisler, R.P. Hall, K.A.R. Kalavar, D.B. Calne, Erythromelalgia-like eruption in L. Guthrie, Reoperation for device infection and erosion following deep brain
parkinsonian patients treated with bromocriptine, Neurology 31 (1981) stimulation implantable pulse generator placement, J. Neurosurg. (2019) 1–8,
1368–1370, https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.31.10.1368. https://doi.org/10.3171/2019.3.jns183023.
[209] B.E. Monk, J.D. Parkes, A. Du Vivier, Erythromelalgia following pergolide [232] C. Constantoyannis, C. Berk, C.R. Honey, I. Mendez, R.M. Brownstone, Reducing
administration, Br. J. Dermatol. 111 (1984) 97–99, https://doi.org/10.1111/ hardware-related complications of deep brain stimulation, Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 32
j.1365-2133.1984.tb04022.x. (2005) 194–200, https://doi.org/10.1017/

Chunk 76:
ns183023.
[209] B.E. Monk, J.D. Parkes, A. Du Vivier, Erythromelalgia following pergolide [232] C. Constantoyannis, C. Berk, C.R. Honey, I. Mendez, R.M. Brownstone, Reducing
administration, Br. J. Dermatol. 111 (1984) 97–99, https://doi.org/10.1111/ hardware-related complications of deep brain stimulation, Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 32
j.1365-2133.1984.tb04022.x. (2005) 194–200, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0317167100003966.
[210] A. Benitez, H. Edens, J. Fishman, K. Moran, M. Asgharnejad, Rotigotine [233] S.M. Falowski, Y.C. Ooi, R.A.E. Bakay, Long-Term Evaluation of Changes in
transdermal system: Developing continuous dopaminergic delivery to treat Operative Technique and Hardware-Related Complications with Deep Brain
Parkinson’s disease and restless legs syndrome, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1329 (2014) Stimulation, Neuromodulation 18 (2015) 670–676, https://doi.org/10.1111/
45–66, https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12508. ner.12335.
´
[211] J.P. Elshoff, M. Braun, J.O. Andreas, M. Middle, W. Cawello, Steady-State Plasma [234] M. Rossi, V. Bruno, J. Arena, A. Cammarota, M. Merello, Challenges in PD Patient
Concentration Profile of Transdermal Rotigotine: An Integrated Analysis of Three, Management After DBS: A Pragmatic Review, Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. 5 (2018)
Open-Label, Randomized, Phase I Multiple Dose Studies, Clin. Therapeut. 34 246–254, https://doi.org/10.1002/mdc3.12592.
(2012) 966–978, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2012.02.008. [235] X. Hu, X. Jiang, X. Zhou, J. Liang, L. Wang, Y. Cao, J. Liu, A. Jin, P. Yang,
[212] F.S. Sprenger, K. Seppi, W. Poewe, Drug safety evaluation of rotigotine, Expet Avoidance and management of surgical and hardware-related complications of
Opin. Drug Saf. 11 (2012) 503–512, https://doi.org/10.1517/ deep brain stimulation, Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 88 (2010) 296–303,
14740338.2012.678830. https://doi.org/10.1159/000316762.
[213] UCB, Highlights of Prescribing Information. Neupro (Rotigotine), 2020. https:// [236] K.A. Sillay, P.S. Larson,

Chunk 77:
rotigotine, Expet Avoidance and management of surgical and hardware-related complications of
Opin. Drug Saf. 11 (2012) 503–512, https://doi.org/10.1517/ deep brain stimulation, Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 88 (2010) 296–303,
14740338.2012.678830. https://doi.org/10.1159/000316762.
[213] UCB, Highlights of Prescribing Information. Neupro (Rotigotine), 2020. https:// [236] K.A. Sillay, P.S. Larson, P.A. Starr, Deep brain stimulator hardware-related
www.neupro.com/neupro-prescribing-information.pdf. (Accessed 17 October infections: Incidence and management in a large series, Neurosurgery 62 (2008)
2020). 360–366, https://doi.org/10.1227/01.neu.0000316002.03765.33.
[214] C.W. Olanow, D.G. Standaert, K. Kieburtz, T. Viegas, R. Moreadith, Once-Weekly [237] M.G. Spillantini, M.L. Schmidt, V.M.-Y. Lee, J.Q. Trojanowski, R. Jakes,
Subcutaneous Delivery of Polymer-Linked Rotigotine (SER-214) Provides M. Goedert, Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies, Nature 388 (1997) 839–840,
Continuous Plasma Levels in Parkinson’s Disease Patients, Mov. Disord. 35 https://doi.org/10.1038/42166.
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28027. [238] R.B. Postuma, D. Berg, M. Stern, W. Poewe, C.W. Olanow, W. Oertel, J. Obeso,
[215] A. Antonini, E. Tolosa, Apomorphine and levodopa infusion therapies for K. Marek, I. Litvan, A.E. Lang, G. Halliday, C.G. Goetz, T. Gasser, B. Dubois,
advanced Parkinson’s disease: Selection criteria and patient management, Expert P. Chan, B.R. Bloem, C.H. Adler, G. Deuschl, MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for
Rev. Neurother. 9 (2009) 859–867, https://doi.org/10.1586/ern.09.48. Parkinson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 1591–1601, https://doi.org/
[216] F. Carbone, A. Djamshidian, K. Seppi, W. Poewe, Apomorphine for Parkinson’s 10.1002/mds.26424.
Disease: Efficacy and Safety of Current and New Formulations, CNS Drugs 33 [239] W.R. Gibb, A.J. Lees, The relevance of the Lewy body to the pathogenesis of
(2019) 905–918, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-019-00661-z. idiopathic Park

Chunk 78:
nson’s disease, Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 1591–1601, https://doi.org/
[216] F. Carbone, A. Djamshidian, K. Seppi, W. Poewe, Apomorphine for Parkinson’s 10.1002/mds.26424.
Disease: Efficacy and Safety of Current and New Formulations, CNS Drugs 33 [239] W.R. Gibb, A.J. Lees, The relevance of the Lewy body to the pathogenesis of
(2019) 905–918, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-019-00661-z. idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 51 (1988)
[217] R. Katzenschlager, W. Poewe, O. Rascol, C. Trenkwalder, G. Deuschl, K. 745–752, https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.51.6.745.
R. Chaudhuri, T. Henriksen, T. van Laar, K. Spivey, S. Vel, H. Staines, A. Lees, [240] G. Rizzo, M. Copetti, S. Arcuti, D. Martino, A. Fontana, G. Logroscino, Accuracy of
Apomorphine subcutaneous infusion in patients with Parkinson’s disease with clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease, Neurology 86 (2016) 566–576, https://
persistent motor fluctuations (TOLEDO): a multicentre, double-blind, doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002350.
randomised, placebo-controlled trial, Lancet Neurol. 17 (2018) 749–759, https:// [241] C.H. Adler, T.G. Beach, J.G. Hentz, H.A. Shill, J.N. Caviness, E. Driver-Dunckley,
doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30239-4. M.N. Sabbagh, L.I. Sue, S.A. Jacobson, C.M. Belden, B.N. Dugger, Low clinical
[218] H.L. Tyne, J. Parsons, A. Sinnott, S.H. Fox, N.A. Fletcher, M.J. Steiger, A 10 year diagnostic accuracy of early vs advanced Parkinson disease: Clinicopathologic
retrospective audit of long-term apomorphine use in Parkinson’s disease, study, Neurology 83 (2014) 406–412, https://doi.org/10.1212/
J. Neurol. 251 (2004) 1370–1374, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-004-0547-4. WNL.0000000000000641.
[219] A.J. Manson, K. Turner, A.J. Lees, Apomorphine monotherapy in the treatment of [242] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, P. Cortelli, M.P. Giannoccaro, M.A. Jaber, A. Baruzzi,
refractory motor complications of Parkinson’s disease: Long-term follow-up study R. Liguori, Skin sympathetic fiber α-synucle

Chunk 79:
.1212/
J. Neurol. 251 (2004) 1370–1374, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-004-0547-4. WNL.0000000000000641.
[219] A.J. Manson, K. Turner, A.J. Lees, Apomorphine monotherapy in the treatment of [242] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, P. Cortelli, M.P. Giannoccaro, M.A. Jaber, A. Baruzzi,
refractory motor complications of Parkinson’s disease: Long-term follow-up study R. Liguori, Skin sympathetic fiber α-synuclein deposits: A potential biomarker for
of 64 patients, Mov. Disord. 17 (2002) 1235–1241, https://doi.org/10.1002/ pure autonomic failure, Neurology 80 (2013) 725–732, https://doi.org/10.1212/
mds.10281. WNL.0b013e3182825127.
75

---PAGE BREAK---

N. Niemann et al. P a r k i n s o n i s m a n d R e l a t e d D i s o r d ers82(2021)61–76
[243] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, G. Rizzo, S. Capellari, R. Pantieri, M. Stanzani Maserati, pathology, Acta Neuropathol. 128 (2014) 99–109, https://doi.org/10.1007/
G. Devigili, R. Eleopra, G. Defazio, F. Montini, A. Baruzzi, R. Liguori, A new s00401-014-1284-0.
potential biomarker for dementia with Lewy bodies, Neurology 89 (2017) [260] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, C. Piccinini, P. Cortelli, M.P. Giannoccaro, A. Baruzzi,
318–326, https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000004146. R. Liguori, Skin nerve misfolded α-synuclein in pure autonomic failure and
[244] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, V. Leta, M.P. Giannoccaro, C. Scaglione, P. Martinelli, Parkinson disease, Ann. Neurol. 79 (2016) 306–316, https://doi.org/10.1002/
S. Capellari, P. Avoni, A. Baruzzi, R. Liguori, Skin nerve -synuclein deposits: A ana.24567.
biomarker for idiopathic Parkinson disease, Neurology 82 (2014) 1362–1369, [261] K. Doppler, J. Weis, K. Karl, S. Ebert, J. Ebentheuer, C. Trenkwalder, S. Klebe,
https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000000316. J. Volkmann, C. Sommer, Distinctive distribution of phospho-alpha-synuclein in
[245] H. Fujiwara, M. Hasegawa, N. Dohmae, A. Kawashima, E. Masliah, M.S. Goldberg, dermal nerves in multiple system atrophy, Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 1688–1692,
J. Shen, K. 

Chunk 80:
014) 1362–1369, [261] K. Doppler, J. Weis, K. Karl, S. Ebert, J. Ebentheuer, C. Trenkwalder, S. Klebe,
https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000000316. J. Volkmann, C. Sommer, Distinctive distribution of phospho-alpha-synuclein in
[245] H. Fujiwara, M. Hasegawa, N. Dohmae, A. Kawashima, E. Masliah, M.S. Goldberg, dermal nerves in multiple system atrophy, Mov. Disord. 30 (2015) 1688–1692,
J. Shen, K. Takio, T. Iwatsubo, α-synuclein is phosphorylated in synucleinopathy https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26293.
lesions, Nat. Cell Biol. 4 (2002) 160–164, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb748. [262] C.H. Gibbons, J. Garcia, N. Wang, L.C. Shih, R. Freeman, The diagnostic
[246] S. Tenreiro, K. Eckermann, T.F. Outeiro, Protein phosphorylation in discrimination of cutaneous α-synuclein deposition in Parkinson disease,
neurodegeneration: friend or foe? Front. Mol. Neurosci. 7 (2014) https://doi.org/ Neurology 87 (2016) 505–512, https://doi.org/10.1212/
10.3389/fnmol.2014.00042. WNL.0000000000002919.
[247] N. Wang, C.H. Gibbons, J. Lafo, B.S.R. Freeman, α-Synuclein in cutaneous [263] J. Navarro-Otano, J. Casanova-Moll`a, M. Morales, J. Valls-Sol´e, E. Tolosa,
autonomic nerves, Neurology 81 (2013) 1604–1610, https://doi.org/10.1212/ Cutaneous autonomic denervation in Parkinson’s disease, J. Neural. Transm. 122
WNL.0b013e3182a9f449. (2015) 1149–1155, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-014-1355-3.
[248] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, O. El-Agnaf, G. Rizzo, N. Vaikath, F. Del Sorbo, [264] L. Zange, C. Noack, K. Hahn, W. Stenzel, A. Lipp, Phosphorylated α-synuclein in
C. Scaglione, S. Capellari, A. Elia, M. Stanzani Maserati, R. Pantieri, R. Liguori, skin nerve fibres differentiates Parkinson’s disease from multiple system atrophy,
Skin α-synuclein deposits differ in clinical variants of synucleinopathy: an in vivo Brain 138 (2015) 2310–2321, https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv138.
study, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 14246, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32588-8. [265] K. Tsukita, H. Sakamaki-Tsukita, K. Tanaka, T. S

Chunk 81:
Maserati, R. Pantieri, R. Liguori, skin nerve fibres differentiates Parkinson’s disease from multiple system atrophy,
Skin α-synuclein deposits differ in clinical variants of synucleinopathy: an in vivo Brain 138 (2015) 2310–2321, https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv138.
study, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 14246, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32588-8. [265] K. Tsukita, H. Sakamaki-Tsukita, K. Tanaka, T. Suenaga, R. Takahashi, Value of in
[249] M. Ikemura, Y. Saito, R. Sengoku, Y. Sakiyama, H. Hatsuta, K. Kanemaru, vivo α-synuclein deposits in Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review and meta-
M. Sawabe, T. Arai, G. Ito, T. Iwatsubo, M. Fukayama, S. Murayama, Lewy body analysis, Mov. Disord. 34 (2019) 1452–1463, https://doi.org/10.1002/
pathology involves cutaneous nerves, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 67 (2008) mds.27794.
945–953, https://doi.org/10.1097/NEN.0b013e318186de48. [266] X. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Yuan, Q. He, Y. Gao, C. Jiang, L. Li, Y. Xu, Optimization of the
[250] T.G. Beach, C.H. Adler, L.I. Sue, L. Vedders, L.F. Lue, C.L. White, H. Akiyama, J. Detection Method for Phosphorylated α-Synuclein in Parkinson Disease by Skin
N. Caviness, H.A. Shill, M.N. Sabbagh, D.G. Walker, Multi-organ distribution of Biopsy, Front. Neurol. 11 (2020) 1113, https://doi.org/10.3389/
phosphorylated α-synuclein histopathology in subjects with Lewy body disorders, fneur.2020.569446.
Acta Neuropathol. 119 (2010) 689–702, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-010- [267] L.M. Chahine, T.G. Beach, M.C. Brumm, C.H. Adler, C.S. Coffey, S. Mosovsky,
0664-3. C. Caspell-Garcia, G.E. Serrano, D.G. Munoz, C.L. White, J.F. Crary, D. Jennings,
[251] E. Gelpi, J. Navarro-Otano, E. Tolosa, C. Gaig, Y. Compta, M.J. Rey, M.J. Martí, P. Taylor, T. Foroud, V. Arnedo, C.M. Kopil, L. Riley, K.D. Dave, B. Mollenhauer,
I. Hern´andez, F. Valldeoriola, R. Ren˜´e, T. Ribalta, Multiple organ involvement by Systemic Synuclein Sampling Study, In vivo distribution of α-synuclein in
alpha-synuclein pathology in lewy body disorde

Chunk 82:
 J.F. Crary, D. Jennings,
[251] E. Gelpi, J. Navarro-Otano, E. Tolosa, C. Gaig, Y. Compta, M.J. Rey, M.J. Martí, P. Taylor, T. Foroud, V. Arnedo, C.M. Kopil, L. Riley, K.D. Dave, B. Mollenhauer,
I. Hern´andez, F. Valldeoriola, R. Ren˜´e, T. Ribalta, Multiple organ involvement by Systemic Synuclein Sampling Study, In vivo distribution of α-synuclein in
alpha-synuclein pathology in lewy body disorders, Mov. Disord. 29 (2014) multiple tissues and biofluids in Parkinson disease, Neurology 95 (2020)
1010–1018, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.25776. e1267–e1284, https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000010404.
[252] C.H. Gibbons, N. Wang, R. Freeman, Cutaneous Alpha-Synuclein from Paraffin [268] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, G. Rizzo, R. De Micco, A. Tessitore, G. Devigili, F. Del
Embedded Autopsy Specimens in Parkinson’s Disease, J. Parkinsons Dis. 7 (2017) Sorbo, S. Bonvegna, R. Infante, M. Magnani, C. Zenesini, L. Vignatelli, R. Cilia,
503–509, https://doi.org/10.3233/JPD-171088. R. Eleopra, G. Tedeschi, R. Liguori, Skin Biopsy May Help to Distinguish Multiple
[253] K. Doppler, H.M. Jentschke, L. Schulmeyer, D. Vadasz, A. Janzen, M. Luster, System Atrophy-Parkinsonism from Parkinson’s Disease with Orthostatic
H. Ho¨ffken, G. Mayer, J. Brumberg, J. Booij, T. Musacchio, S. Klebe, E. Sittig- Hypotension, Mov. Disord. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28126.
Wiegand, J. Volkmann, C. Sommer, W.H. Oertel, Dermal phospho-alpha- [269] V. Donadio, A. Incensi, F. Del Sorbo, G. Rizzo, R. Infante, C. Scaglione,
synuclein deposits confirm REM sleep behaviour disorder as prodromal N. Modugno, E. Fileccia, A.E. Elia, F. Cencini, R. Liguori, Skin nerve
Parkinson’s disease, Acta Neuropathol. 133 (2017) 535–545, https://doi.org/ phosphorylated a-synuclein deposits in Parkinson disease with orthostatic
10.1007/s00401-017-1684-z. hypotension, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 77 (2018) 942–949, https://doi.org/
[254] G. Melli, E. Vacchi, V. Biemmi, S. Galati, C. Staedler, R. Ambrosini, A. Kaelin- 10.1093

Chunk 83:
cia, A.E. Elia, F. Cencini, R. Liguori, Skin nerve
Parkinson’s disease, Acta Neuropathol. 133 (2017) 535–545, https://doi.org/ phosphorylated a-synuclein deposits in Parkinson disease with orthostatic
10.1007/s00401-017-1684-z. hypotension, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 77 (2018) 942–949, https://doi.org/
[254] G. Melli, E. Vacchi, V. Biemmi, S. Galati, C. Staedler, R. Ambrosini, A. Kaelin- 10.1093/jnen/nly074.
Lang, Cervical skin denervation associates with alpha-synuclein aggregates in [270] R. Infante, C. Scaglione, A. Incensi, G. Rizzo, R. Liguori, V. Donadio,
Parkinson disease, Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 5 (2018) 1394–1407, https://doi. A Longitudinal Skin Biopsy Study of Phosphorylated Alpha-Synuclein in a Patient
org/10.1002/acn3.669. With Parkinson Disease and Orthostatic Hypotension, J. Neuropathol. Exp.
[255] S. Mazzetti, M.J. Basellini, V. Ferri, E. Cassani, E. Cereda, M. Paolini, A. Neurol. 79 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlaa048.
M. Calogero, C. Bolliri, M. De Leonardis, G. Sacilotto, R. Cilia, G. Cappelletti, [271] M. Shahnawaz, A. Mukherjee, S. Pritzkow, N. Mendez, P. Rabadia, X. Liu, B. Hu,
G. Pezzoli, α-Synuclein oligomers in skin biopsy of idiopathic and monozygotic A. Schmeichel, W. Singer, G. Wu, A.-L. Tsai, H. Shirani, K.P.R. Nilsson, P.A. Low,
twin patients with Parkinson’s disease, Brain 143 (2020) 920–931, https://doi. C. Soto, Discriminating α-synuclein strains in Parkinson’s disease and multiple
org/10.1093/brain/awaa008. system atrophy, Nature 578 (2020) 273–277, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
[256] H.H. Kr¨amer, G. Lautenschla¨ger, M. de Azevedo, K. Doppler, A. Sch¨anzer, C. Best, 020-1984-7.
W.H. Oertel, I. Reuter, C. Sommer, F. Birklein, Reduced central sympathetic [272] S. Manne, N. Kondru, H. Jin, G.E. Serrano, V. Anantharam, A. Kanthasamy, C.
activity in Parkinson’s disease, Brain Behav 9 (2019), e01463, https://doi.org/ H. Adler, T.G. Beach, A.G. Kanthasamy, Blinded RT-QuIC Analysis of α-Synuclein
10.1002/brb3.1463. Biomarke

Chunk 84:
Azevedo, K. Doppler, A. Sch¨anzer, C. Best, 020-1984-7.
W.H. Oertel, I. Reuter, C. Sommer, F. Birklein, Reduced central sympathetic [272] S. Manne, N. Kondru, H. Jin, G.E. Serrano, V. Anantharam, A. Kanthasamy, C.
activity in Parkinson’s disease, Brain Behav 9 (2019), e01463, https://doi.org/ H. Adler, T.G. Beach, A.G. Kanthasamy, Blinded RT-QuIC Analysis of α-Synuclein
10.1002/brb3.1463. Biomarker in Skin Tissue from Parkinson’s Disease Patients, Mov. Disord. (2020),
[257] V. Donadio, K. Doppler, A. Incensi, A. Kuzkina, A. Janzen, G. Mayer, J. Volkmann, https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.28242.
G. Rizzo, E. Antelmi, G. Plazzi, C. Sommer, R. Liguori, W.H. Oertel, Abnormal [273] Z. Wang, K. Becker, V. Donadio, S. Siedlak, J. Yuan, M. Rezaee, A. Incensi,
α-synuclein deposits in skin nerves: intra- and inter-laboratory reproducibility, A. Kuzkina, C.D. Orrú, C. Tatsuoka, R. Liguori, S.A. Gunzler, B. Caughey, M.
Eur. J. Neurol. 26 (2019) 1245–1251, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.13939. E. Jimenez-Capdeville, X. Zhu, K. Doppler, L. Cui, S.G. Chen, J. Ma, W.-Q. Zou,
[258] Y. Miki, M. Tomiyama, T. Ueno, R. Haga, H. Nishijima, C. Suzuki, F. Mori, Skin α-Synuclein Aggregation Seeding Activity as a Novel Biomarker for
M. Kaimori, M. Baba, K. Wakabayashi, Clinical availability of skin biopsy in the Parkinson Disease, JAMA Neurol (2020), https://doi.org/10.1001/
diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, Neurosci. Lett. 469 (2010) 357–359, https://doi. jamaneurol.2020.3311.
org/10.1016/j.neulet.2009.12.027. [274] C. Ren, F. Wang, L.-N. Guan, X.-Y. Cheng, C.-Y. Zhang, D.-Q. Geng, C.-F. Liu,
[259] K. Doppler, S. Ebert, N. Üçeyler, C. Trenkwalder, J. Ebentheuer, J. Volkmann, A compendious summary of Parkinson’s disease patient-derived iPSCs in the first
C. Sommer, Cutaneous neuropathy in Parkinson’s disease: A window into brain decade, Ann. Transl. Med. 7 (2019) 685, https://doi.org/10.21037/
atm.2019.11.16. –685.
76

---PAGE BREAK---



Chunk 85:
er, S. Ebert, N. Üçeyler, C. Trenkwalder, J. Ebentheuer, J. Volkmann, A compendious summary of Parkinson’s disease patient-derived iPSCs in the first
C. Sommer, Cutaneous neuropathy in Parkinson’s disease: A window into brain decade, Ann. Transl. Med. 7 (2019) 685, https://doi.org/10.21037/
atm.2019.11.16. –685.
76

---PAGE BREAK---



