Chunk 1:
AgeingResearchReviews80(2022)101681
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ageing Research Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/arr
Review
Role of platelet in Parkinson’s disease: Insights into pathophysiology &
theranostic solutions
Samir Kumar Beura, Abhishek Ramachandra Panigrahi, Pooja Yadav, Sunil Kumar Singh*
Department of Zoology, School of Biological Sciences, Central University of Punjab, Ghudda, Bathinda, Punjab 151401, India
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second-most-common neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor and non-
Parkinson’s disease motor dysfunctions, which currently affects about 10 million people worldwide. Gradual death and progressive
Substantia nigra loss of dopaminergic neurons in the pars compacta region of substantia nigra result in striatal dopamine defi-
Dopamine ciency in PD. Specific mutation with further aggregation of α-synuclein in the intraneuronal inclusion bodies is
Blood platelet
considered the neuropathological hallmark of this disease. PD is often associated with various organelle dys-
Mitochondria
α-synuclein functions inside a dopaminergic neuron, including mitochondrial damage, proteasomal impairment, and pro-
duction of reactive oxygen species, thus causing subsequent neuronal death. Apart from several genetic and non-
genetic risk factors, emerging research establishes an association between cardiovascular diseases, including
coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, and ischemic stroke with PD. The ma-
jority of these cardiovascular diseases have an origin from atherosclerosis, where endothelial dysfunction
following thrombus formation is significantly regulated by blood platelet. This non-nucleated cell fragment
expresses not only neuron-specific molecules and receptors but also several PD-specific biomarkers such as
α-synuclein, parkin, PTEN-induced kinase-1, tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine transporter, thus making

Chunk 2:
ovascular diseases have an origin from atherosclerosis, where endothelial dysfunction
following thrombus formation is significantly regulated by blood platelet. This non-nucleated cell fragment
expresses not only neuron-specific molecules and receptors but also several PD-specific biomarkers such as
α-synuclein, parkin, PTEN-induced kinase-1, tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine transporter, thus making platelet a
suitable peripheral model for PD. Besides its similarity with a dopaminergic neuron, platelet structural alter-
ations, as well as functional abnormalities, are also evident in PD. However, the molecular mechanism behind
platelet dysfunction is still elusive and quite controversial. This state-of-the-art review describes the detailed
mechanism of platelet impairment in PD, addressing the novel platelet-associated therapeutic drug candidates for
plausible PD management.
1. Introduction in protein misfolding along with their aggregation, mitochondrial
damage causing energy failure, generation of oxidative stress, and
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder impairment of protein clearance pathways, which are proposed to be the
(NDD) that affects the pars compacta region of substantia nigra (SNpc) primary reasons behind the death of DA neurons (Fig. 1) (Kalia and
containing dopaminergic (DA) neurons, thus causing motor as well as Lang, 2015). Although the complete etiology of this disease is obscure, it
non-motor impairments (Bloem et al., 2021). The first narration about has been proposed that environmental factors, including pesticide
PD originates back in 1817 when a British physician named James exposure, heavy metal use, and drug abuse, greatly influence the time
Parkinson described a malady as Paralysis Agitans (Shaking Palsy) in his and severity of this disease onset. In contrast, genetic contribution partly
text “Essay on the Shaking Palsy” (Tysnes and Storstein, 2017). Later, a determines the lethality of this disease (Ball et a

Chunk 3:
nates back in 1817 when a British physician named James exposure, heavy metal use, and drug abuse, greatly influence the time
Parkinson described a malady as Paralysis Agitans (Shaking Palsy) in his and severity of this disease onset. In contrast, genetic contribution partly
text “Essay on the Shaking Palsy” (Tysnes and Storstein, 2017). Later, a determines the lethality of this disease (Ball et al., 2019). Apart from
famous French neurologist of the 19th century, Jean-Martin Charcot, these involvements, several cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), including
studied this illness and renamed Paralysis Agitans as “Maladie De Par- ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, coronary heart disease, and
kinson” or “Parkinson’s Disease” between 1868 and 1881, and the term congestive heart failure, are considered promising risk factors for the
ensues till-date (Blonder, 2018). The selective degeneration of the development of PD in recent times (Park et al., 2020). Thrombosis
distinct DA neurons in the SNpc region is caused by the accumulation of associated with atherosclerotic plaque formation is regarded as the
Lewy bodies containing intracellular aggregates of α-synuclein protein principal reason behind the majority of CVDs, where platelet, a blood
(Bloem et al., 2021). The α-synuclein, and other associated factors, result component, plays a pivotal role in regulating the formation as well as
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: singh.sunil06@gmail.com, sunil.singh@cup.edu.in (S.K. Singh).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2022.101681
Received 3 March 2022; Received in revised form 19 May 2022; Accepted 29 June 2022
Availableonline4July2022
1568-1637/©2022ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
stability of vascular thrombi (Koupenova et al., 2017). reason behind this male preponderance is still an inexplicit context
Platelets are very small non-nucleated cell fragments having a (Ascherio and Sch

Chunk 4:
ay 2022; Accepted 29 June 2022
Availableonline4July2022
1568-1637/©2022ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
stability of vascular thrombi (Koupenova et al., 2017). reason behind this male preponderance is still an inexplicit context
Platelets are very small non-nucleated cell fragments having a (Ascherio and Schwarzschild, 2016).
diameter of 2–4µm that originate from megakaryocytes in bone marrow PD is a multi-systemic disorder that is characterized by a combina-
via thrombopoiesis. Platelets are the smallest blood cells having discoid tion of both motor as well as non-motor symptoms during its patho-
shapes, which remain in blood circulation for 7–10 days, and later get progression. The motor dysfunctions include consistent tremors, altered
destroyed by phagocytosis in the liver and spleen (van der Meijden and gait, slow movement (bradykinesia), disturbed balance, muscular ri-
Heemskerk, 2019). An average healthy adult can produce about 1011 gidity, and postural instability (Poewe et al., 2017). Bradykinesia often
platelets per day, whereas the average platelet count in circulation leads to the appearance of a tendency for shuffling gait as well as the
ranges from 150,000 to 400,000 per microliter of blood (Ghoshal and development of an expressionless face (hypomimia) accompanied by
Bhattacharyya, 2014). Owing to their unique granular composition, lower amplitudes of handwriting (micrographia) in PD (Sveinbjorns-
platelets help in hemostasis, thrombosis, tissue proliferation, and dottir, 2016). Apart from the motor impairment, several non-motor
immunomodulation (Fig. 2) (van der Meijden and Heemskerk, 2019). In complications such as abnormal constipation, altered sleep-wake
addition to their conventional roles, platelets are nowadays gaining cycle, orthostatic hypotension, urinary disturbances, excessive halluci-
significant attention for their outstanding contributions in provid

Chunk 5:
 2016). Apart from the motor impairment, several non-motor
immunomodulation (Fig. 2) (van der Meijden and Heemskerk, 2019). In complications such as abnormal constipation, altered sleep-wake
addition to their conventional roles, platelets are nowadays gaining cycle, orthostatic hypotension, urinary disturbances, excessive halluci-
significant attention for their outstanding contributions in providing nations, loss of smell (anosmia), persistent sleeplessness (insomnia),
intercellular communication between the brain and blood, thus cognition impairment, and especially dementia also occur in PD (Poewe
considering them the peripheral models for NDDs (Leiter and Walker, et al., 2017; Marinus et al., 2018).
2020). Furthermore, platelets also store and secrete several
neuron-specific molecules, including neurotransmitters like glutamate, 2.2. Etiology and risk factors of Parkinson’s disease
dopamine, serotonin, and histamine, as well as express their transporter
and receptors besides tau, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, mono- Although several theories and proposed mechanisms have been
amine oxidase, amyloid-beta, and reelin (Fig. 4) (Beura et al., 2022). postulated regarding the possible etiological origin of PD, none has been
Although there are significant research findings available in deciphering conclusively proven so far. Among those theories, the relative contribu-
the involvement of platelet in PD, there is no thorough review that exists tion of genetic mechanisms, environmental factors, and lifestyle ap-
yet addressing the role of platelet in the pathophysiology of PD. As the proaches remain conflicting (Poewe et al., 2017). On this etiological basis,
platelet structural and functional alterations are evident in PD, here in PD has been classified into two broad categories, such as familial PD
this concise review, we appraise the detailed role of platelet in the (having an inheritance in either the autosomal dominant or autosomal
pathoprogression of PD (Fig. 3).

Chunk 6:
 As the proaches remain conflicting (Poewe et al., 2017). On this etiological basis,
platelet structural and functional alterations are evident in PD, here in PD has been classified into two broad categories, such as familial PD
this concise review, we appraise the detailed role of platelet in the (having an inheritance in either the autosomal dominant or autosomal
pathoprogression of PD (Fig. 3). Being a rich source of growth factors, recessive pattern) and sporadic/idiopathic PD (having an origin from
we have highlighted the utilization of several platelet-rich growth fac- environment-gene interaction) (Ball et al., 2019). The familial PD con-
tors for DA neurogenesis in PD. However, we are also addressing the stitutes about 15% of total PD patients, who have an earlier family his-
novel platelet-based diagnostic and therapeutic solutions for the effi- tory, and 5–10% of PD affected ones have a monogenic form of
cient management of PD. Further experiments could unveil a mecha- Mendelian inheritance. At least 23 genetic loci, in addition to 19
nistic insight into the molecular signaling of other PD-specific proteins disease-causing genes, have been identified and further classified in PD till
in platelet, which will help in proposing additional platelet-associated date (Deng et al., 2018). Major genes which are involved in the patho-
medications to be used for plausible therapeutic treatment in PD. genesis of PD include α-synuclein (SNCA/PARK1/4), Parkin
(PRKN/PARK2), ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase like 1 (UCHL1/PARK5),
2. Parkinson’s disease (PD) PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1/ PARK6), DJ1 (PARK7), Leucine-rich
repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2/PARK8), ATPase type 13A2 (ATP13A2/-
PD is a common neurodegenerative disorder that can cause significant PARK9), and GRB10 Interacting GYF Protein 2 (GIGYF2/ PARK11), etc.
disability and decreased quality of life, where its pathogenesis and origin (Fig. 1) (Va´zquez-V´elez and Zoghbi, 2021). Apart from familial PD,
remain essentially co

Chunk 7:
NK1/ PARK6), DJ1 (PARK7), Leucine-rich
repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2/PARK8), ATPase type 13A2 (ATP13A2/-
PD is a common neurodegenerative disorder that can cause significant PARK9), and GRB10 Interacting GYF Protein 2 (GIGYF2/ PARK11), etc.
disability and decreased quality of life, where its pathogenesis and origin (Fig. 1) (Va´zquez-V´elez and Zoghbi, 2021). Apart from familial PD,
remain essentially controversial. In most instances, PD is considered to different environmental factors like prolonged use of pesticides, fertilizers,
result from a complex interaction between several genetic and multiple heavy metals, and several lifestyle diseases can cause the early onset of
environmental factors, though rare monogenic forms of this disease also idiopathic/sporadic PD (Emamzadeh and Surguchov, 2018). For example,
exist (Poewe et al., 2017). The various forms of PD generate an alarming long-term exposure to pesticides like dieldrin (an organochlorine), rote-
health care issue with a profound global impact. The degeneration of the none (an organophosphate), and permethrin (synthetic pyrethroids)
nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway involves various neuronal systems, causes DA neuronal death and subsequent PD (Ball et al., 2019). In
causing several neuromediator dysfunctions that account for the complex addition, a contaminant of synthetic heroin, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,
patterns of functional deficits in PD (Bloem et al., 2021). 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), which is structurally similar to herbicide
paraquat, is a potent neurotoxin to induce PD (Pang et al., 2019). Not only
2.1. Epidemiology and symptoms of Parkinson’s disease pesticides but also prolonged exposure to several heavy metals, including
iron, copper, manganese, lead, and mercury, can potentially amplify the
The epidemiological investigations in PD have provided several vital risk of PD (Ball et al., 2019). Apart from this, an increased risk of PD has
pieces of evidence about the behavioral and environmental patter

Chunk 8:
miology and symptoms of Parkinson’s disease pesticides but also prolonged exposure to several heavy metals, including
iron, copper, manganese, lead, and mercury, can potentially amplify the
The epidemiological investigations in PD have provided several vital risk of PD (Ball et al., 2019). Apart from this, an increased risk of PD has
pieces of evidence about the behavioral and environmental patterns of often been correlated with a history of melanoma, the occurrence of type 2
the disease pathogenesis as well as progression. The current global diabetes mellitus, the incidence of traumatic brain injury, and consump-
prevalence of this disease is around 0.3%, which increases very sharply tion of dairy products (Ascherio and Schwarzschild, 2016). In contrast, a
to about 3% in those of 80 years or older. It had already affected reduced PD risk has been reported in individuals consuming caffeine,
approximately 6.1 million people worldwide, according to an estimation smoking tobacco, and drinking alcohol (Pang et al., 2019).
in 2016, and the number of disease cases is a matter of concern, as the
number of affected people with PD is expected to double by 2030 2.3. Pathology and physiology of Parkinson’s disease
(Poewe et al., 2017). The annual incidence rate of PD is determined to be
14 in every 1,00,000 individuals in the total population and 160 Although the exact mechanism for loss of DA neurons in SNpc is not
PD-affected persons out of 1,00,000 people with an age of 65 years or well understood, several proposed theories support the subcellular
older (Ascherio and Schwarzschild, 2016). Although most of the PD impairment in DA neurons. The pathoclinical results demonstrate the
cases are restricted to an age of 65 years or more, the age of onset for Lewy bodies containing an aggregation of misfolded α-synuclein as the
almost 25% of PD-affected individuals is below 65 years (Bloem et al., major hallmark of PD (Bloem et al., 2021). In addition, mitochondrial
2021). Moreover,

Chunk 9:
 2016). Although most of the PD impairment in DA neurons. The pathoclinical results demonstrate the
cases are restricted to an age of 65 years or more, the age of onset for Lewy bodies containing an aggregation of misfolded α-synuclein as the
almost 25% of PD-affected individuals is below 65 years (Bloem et al., major hallmark of PD (Bloem et al., 2021). In addition, mitochondrial
2021). Moreover, in a report, it has been found that about 1.3% of damage, proteasomal impairment, and autophagy dysfunction result
women, as well as 2% of men, are affected by PD in the USA, but the from a complex interaction of several molecules, including α-synuclein
2

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of cellular & molecular mechanism of Parkinson’s disease (PD): PD is caused by the death of DA neurons in SNpc areas by the
mutations and misfolding of several proteins, including α-synuclein. The mutations happen due to genetic reasons or environmental toxins, including MPTP, 6-OHDA,
Rotenone, etc. The misfolding and aggregation of α-synuclein affect several subcellular organelles as well as systems, including mitochondria, proteasomes, and
autophagosomes. The α-synuclein inhibits several components of proteasome, thus hindering its degradation and further accumulation of α-synuclein. Similarly,
α-synuclein in mitochondria enters the organelle through VDAC, thus inhibiting ATP production and further potentiating ROS production and cytochrome C release,
leading to apoptosis. In addition, α-synuclein also inhibits the fusion of lysosome with phagosome interfering with the intracellular clearance mechanism. [α-syn,
Alpha-synuclein; PINK-1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; LRRK2, Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2; UCHL1, Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1; ATP13A2, ATPase cation
transporting 13A2; VPS35, Vacuolar protein sorting ortholog 35; OPA1, Optic atrophy-1; MFN, Mitofusin; mPTP, Mitochondrial permeability transi

Chunk 10:
ibits the fusion of lysosome with phagosome interfering with the intracellular clearance mechanism. [α-syn,
Alpha-synuclein; PINK-1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; LRRK2, Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2; UCHL1, Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1; ATP13A2, ATPase cation
transporting 13A2; VPS35, Vacuolar protein sorting ortholog 35; OPA1, Optic atrophy-1; MFN, Mitofusin; mPTP, Mitochondrial permeability transition pore; VDAC,
Voltage-dependent anion channels; TIM, Translocase of the inner membrane; TOM, Translocase of the outer membrane, MAO-B, Monoamine oxidase B; COMT,
Catechol-O-methyltransferase].
(Kalia and Lang, 2015). For example, α-synuclein is also observed to resulting in mitochondrial swelling and eventually neuronal apoptosis
interact with several mitochondrial fusion proteins, including optic at- (Malpartida et al., 2021). It is evident that the mutated α-synuclein
rophy 1 (OPA1), mitofusin (MFN) 1, and 2, thus causing increased hinders the regular vesicular pathway, where it not only inhibits the
mitochondrial fission as well as elevated mitochondrial fragmentation. docking of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) vesicles to the Golgi but also
Moreover, α-synuclein can be translocated into the inner mitochondrial hinders the movement of vesicles from Golgi to lysosomes, causing ER
membrane (IMM) via voltage-dependent anion channels (VDACs) and stress (Va´zquez-V´elez and Zoghbi, 2021). Mechanistically, α-synuclein
subsequently inhibits their ion channel activity (Fig. 1) (Rocha et al., interacts and inhibits the activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), pre-
2018). In addition, α-synuclein has also been reported to interact with venting its association with coat protein complex II (COPII). The inhi-
various components of the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM), such bition of ATF6 can potentially hinder ER-associated protein degradation
as translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) complex and (ERAD), resulting in ER stress and, ultimately, neuronal apoptosis
the s

Chunk 11:
nuclein has also been reported to interact with venting its association with coat protein complex II (COPII). The inhi-
various components of the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM), such bition of ATF6 can potentially hinder ER-associated protein degradation
as translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) complex and (ERAD), resulting in ER stress and, ultimately, neuronal apoptosis
the sorting and assembly machinery (SAM) complex, thus damaging the (Lehtonen et al., 2019). The clearance of α-synuclein remains an
mitochondrial protein transport system. By damaging the transport essential aspect of the pathoprogression of PD, where its cellular clear-
system, α-synuclein can subsequently aggregate in intermembrane space ance is mediated by either ubiquitin proteasomal system (UPS) or
(IMS), causing depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane and autophagy lysosomal pathway (ALP). Surprisingly, the mutated α-syn-
further generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Pozo Devoto and uclein not only resists proteasomal degradation by damaging several
Falzone, 2017). Most importantly, α-synuclein impairs the respiratory UPS components but also impairs autophagy, thus augmenting the
capacity as well as ATP production by inhibiting complex I activity along further accumulation of this protein inside the neurons (Fig. 1.) (Olanow
with inducing the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) and McNaught, 2006).
opening, subsequent cytochrome C release, and calcium influx, thus
3

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
3. Blood platelet: a peripheral model for Parkinson’s disease with nearly all CVDs has an origin from atherosclerosis, which results in
(PD) the development diseases like cardiac arrhythmias, coronary artery
disease, myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke (Flora and Nayak,
Growing evidence in the field of neurobiology is considering a robust 2019). Atherosclerosis and associated etiologica

Chunk 12:
681
3. Blood platelet: a peripheral model for Parkinson’s disease with nearly all CVDs has an origin from atherosclerosis, which results in
(PD) the development diseases like cardiac arrhythmias, coronary artery
disease, myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke (Flora and Nayak,
Growing evidence in the field of neurobiology is considering a robust 2019). Atherosclerosis and associated etiological cellular factors bring
association between NDDs and CVDs. Among other NDDs, PD has platelet as a highlighting blood component for the pathoprogression of
several non-genetic risk factors, including lifestyle diseases, where the PD that is further discussed in the below sections.
reports of cardiovascular complications are establishing a novel field of
interest (Firoz et al., 2015). The underlying pathoprogression associated
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of granular contents of platelet and platelet functional parameters: Platelet is a tiny blood component that helps in hemostasis
and thrombosis. After any vascular injury, the platelet adheres to the injured endothelium via its surface glycoproteins. Following adhesion, platelets become activated
and secrete several agonists like TXA2, Thrombin, ADP, etc. These agonists further activate other platelets, eventually aggregating to each other by integrin αIIbβ3 and
fibrinogen binding. Platelets possess two prominent granules, i.e., alpha- (carrying protein molecules) and dense-granules (carrying non-protein molecules), which help in
achieving various major platelet functions. [LAMP2, Lysosome-associated membrane protein 2; vWF, von Willebrand factor; TXA2, Thromboxane A2; RANTES,
Regulated upon activation, normal T cell expressed and presumably secreted; FV, Factor V; FIX, Factor IX; IL-8, Interleukin 8; MCP-1, Monocyte chemoattractant protein-
1; MIP-1, Macrophage inflammatory protein-1; PAR1/12, Protease-activated receptors 1/12; TXA2R, Thromboxane A2 receptor; TLT-1, TREM like transcript-1].
4

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Be

Chunk 13:
n Willebrand factor; TXA2, Thromboxane A2; RANTES,
Regulated upon activation, normal T cell expressed and presumably secreted; FV, Factor V; FIX, Factor IX; IL-8, Interleukin 8; MCP-1, Monocyte chemoattractant protein-
1; MIP-1, Macrophage inflammatory protein-1; PAR1/12, Protease-activated receptors 1/12; TXA2R, Thromboxane A2 receptor; TLT-1, TREM like transcript-1].
4

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
3.1. Association of vascular complications in Parkinson’s disease recognition as a successful model system for studying pathoprogression
of PD owing to its storage of a major PD-biomarker, α-synuclein (Fig. 4).
Vascular complications, especially CVDs, have a significant impact In fact, the highest concentration of α-synuclein per milligram of cellular
on the onset of PD. Though brain and heart tissues vary a lot in their protein in blood is found in these small platelets (Tashkandi et al., 2018;
structures and functions, but their excitability, energy metabolism, and Stefaniuk et al., 2021). Moreover, various PD-specific biomarkers,
cellular division bring them to the same table (Firoz et al., 2015). including tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (Drozdov and Anokhina, 1990),
Endothelial dysfunction (ED) is regarded as the initial event that hap- dopamine transporter (DAT) (Frankhauser et al., 2006), vacuolar pro-
pens after a vascular injury and further triggers several cellular and tein sorting ortholog 35 (VPS35) (Rijkers et al., 2017), lysosomal asso-
molecular cascades to form an atherosclerotic plaque (Tana et al., 2018). ciated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2) (Israels et al., 1996), parkin
As the atherosclerotic plaques start rupturing during ED, these plaques, (PRKN) (Lee et al., 2020), PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) (Walsh et al.,
along with the coagulation system, initiate the formation of a fibrin clot, 2018), protein deglycase DJ-1 (Shi et al., 2010) are reported to be
called a thrombus, where a blood cell fragm

Chunk 14:
. ciated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2) (Israels et al., 1996), parkin
As the atherosclerotic plaques start rupturing during ED, these plaques, (PRKN) (Lee et al., 2020), PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) (Walsh et al.,
along with the coagulation system, initiate the formation of a fibrin clot, 2018), protein deglycase DJ-1 (Shi et al., 2010) are reported to be
called a thrombus, where a blood cell fragment known as platelet plays a expressed by platelet, thus making it a suitable peripheral model for PD
predominant role to prevent excessive blood loss (Koupenova et al., (Fig. 3). Therefore, the study of platelet remains fascinating in the
2017). Furthermore, persistent ED accompanied by elevated blood pathoprogression of PD.
levels of proinflammatory molecules such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α
could be a predominant thrombotic risk in PD patients (Tana et al., 4. Role of blood platelet in Parkinson’s disease (PD)
2018). Several classical determinants for CVDs are also considered the
potential risk factors for PD, including hypertension, obesity, hyper- Keeping in account the above biomarkers, the versatile role of
cholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus (Potashkin et al., 2020). Never- platelet, highlighting its apparent systemic involvement in PD, has been
theless, clinical PD patients are reported to have a higher risk of CVDs, markedly recognized. As a result, it becomes indispensable to focus on
including myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, coronary heart dis- the significance of platelet morphology as well as physiology in PD. It
ease, and congestive heart failure (Park et al., 2020). Therefore, the can thus be understood that platelets could be our potential allies in the
blood platelet is indispensable for the development of cerebrovascular near future, by elucidating the effect of its different structural and
complications that can cause the early onset of PD. Platelets are tiny functional alterations in PD (Behari and Shrivastava, 2013). Besides this,
non-nucleat

Chunk 15:
l., 2020). Therefore, the can thus be understood that platelets could be our potential allies in the
blood platelet is indispensable for the development of cerebrovascular near future, by elucidating the effect of its different structural and
complications that can cause the early onset of PD. Platelets are tiny functional alterations in PD (Behari and Shrivastava, 2013). Besides this,
non-nucleated cellular fragments circulating in the blood that primarily platelet secretory components also modulate the disease pathoprog-
contributes to hemostasis, i.e., the process of stopping bleeding at the ression, which is discussed in the following sections (Fig. 3).
site of injured endothelium. In order to accomplish this event, platelet
undergoes four major but coinciding processes of different signaling 4.1. Platelet structural, functional and subcellular organelle impairments
mechanisms such as adhesion, activation, secretion, and aggregation in PD
(Fig. 2) (Li et al., 2010; van der Meijden and Heemskerk, 2019). Apart
from hemostasis, platelet also plays a pivotal role in regulating immune It is evident now that a platelet shares significant similarities with a
functions such as inflammation and phagocytosis (Morrell et al., 2014). neuron, but in addition to that, the platelet also functions as a peripheral
But the exact mechanism of association between CVDs and PD is still model for AD. In AD, several structural, as well as functional alterations
elusive and the role of platelet sometimes remains controversial or even of platelets, occur (Table 1) (Gowert et al., 2014). Like AD, PD has also
counter-intuitive. been associated with several structural as well as functional changes in
platelet. The platelet count is an important clinical parameter, which
3.2. Blood platelet as a peripheral model for Parkinson’s disease decides the severity of an associated disease, and a decreased platelet
number (thrombocytopenia) has been reported in PD patients
Platelets are nowadays gain

Chunk 16:
 PD has also
counter-intuitive. been associated with several structural as well as functional changes in
platelet. The platelet count is an important clinical parameter, which
3.2. Blood platelet as a peripheral model for Parkinson’s disease decides the severity of an associated disease, and a decreased platelet
number (thrombocytopenia) has been reported in PD patients
Platelets are nowadays gaining remarkable recognition for their role (Machaczka et al., 1999; Koçer et al., 2013; Behari and Shrivastava,
beyond hemostasis after vascular injury, thus signifying their pivotal 2013). In contrast to the previous findings, Sharma et al. have reported
contribution in providing intercellular communication between the that platelet count remains unchanged in PD patients (Sharma et al.,
brain and blood (Leiter and Walker, 2020). Emerging research in the 1991). During PD, the platelet swells and increases in size to become
field of platelet biology has demonstrated a striking resemblance be- larger (Pei and Maitta, 2019; Simonidze and Samushia, 2014), which
tween platelet and neuron both in their pattern of degranulation or further gets confirmed, when α-synuclein-deficient mice reported
secretion, vesicular trafficking, as well as expression of surface receptors small-sized platelets accompanied by extensive fragmentation and
(Beura et al., 2022). Surprisingly, the alpha-granules of platelets are degranulation of those platelets (Pei and Maitta, 2019). Apart from an
comparable to that of large dense-core synaptic vesicles of neurons. In increase in size, the platelet shape is also observed to be distorted and
contrast, the dense-granules of platelets resemble that of small stretched, having less membrane invagination in PD patients, thus
dense-core synaptic vesicles of neurons (Leiter and Walker, 2020). validating platelet abnormal structural changes in PD (Simonidze and
Furthermore, the platelets also store and secrete various neurotrans- Samushia, 2014). In addition, the 

Chunk 17:
observed to be distorted and
contrast, the dense-granules of platelets resemble that of small stretched, having less membrane invagination in PD patients, thus
dense-core synaptic vesicles of neurons (Leiter and Walker, 2020). validating platelet abnormal structural changes in PD (Simonidze and
Furthermore, the platelets also store and secrete various neurotrans- Samushia, 2014). In addition, the larger platelet size is caused by an
mitters, including glutamate, serotonin, dopamine, histamine, increased cytoplasmic volume, which is observed in PD patients (Koçer
epinephrine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), as well as ADP, ATP, and et al., 2013; Ferrer-Ravento´s and Beyer, 2021). Along with an increased
Ca2+
in their dense-granules (Ponomarev, 2018). Not only the neuro- platelet volume, the platelet vacuoles of PD patients are also confirmed
transmitters but also the receptors as well as transporters for dopamine to be abnormally bigger than those of healthy individuals, suggesting a
(vesicular monoamine transporter 2/VMAT2), glutamate (excitatory possible mechanism for increased platelet volume (Factor et al., 1994).
amino acid transporters/EAAT), serotonin (serotonin trans- The larger platelet size is also confirmed via the measurement of mean
porter/SERT), GABA (GABA-betaine transporter 1/BGT1), and choline platelet volume (MPV), which is an index of average platelet size. An
(choline transporter-like protein 1/CTL1) are also present in blood increased MPV is reported in PD patients as compared to healthy in-
platelets (Jedlitschky et al., 2012). In addition, platelets also express, dividuals, which was further supported by the finding of elevated MPV
store and secrete several neuron-specific proteins such as amyloid pre- in the presence of exogenous α-synuclein (Koçer et al., 2013; Geyik et al.,
cursor protein (APP), amyloid-beta (Aβ), tau, brain-derived neuro- 2016; Tashkandi et al., 2018). Apart from the structural impairments,
trophic factor (BDNF), monoamine oxid

Chunk 18:
xpress, dividuals, which was further supported by the finding of elevated MPV
store and secrete several neuron-specific proteins such as amyloid pre- in the presence of exogenous α-synuclein (Koçer et al., 2013; Geyik et al.,
cursor protein (APP), amyloid-beta (Aβ), tau, brain-derived neuro- 2016; Tashkandi et al., 2018). Apart from the structural impairments,
trophic factor (BDNF), monoamine oxidase (MAO), reelin, and ephrin platelet functional alterations are also observed in PD patients, including
(Beura et al., 2022). In a study, it has been confirmed that platelet is the changes in adhesion, activation, aggregation, and degranulation of
primary source of circulatory Aβ peptide in human blood, where about platelet. Whenever an injury occurs, the circulating platelets attach to
90% of total circulatory Aβ comes from or is stored in platelets extracellular matrix substances outside the injured endothelium via a
(Inyushin et al., 2020). Apart from this, platelet has been gaining distinct process called adhesion. For example, platelet membrane
5

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Fig. 3. Schematic depiction about major alterations in platelet during Parkinson’s disease (PD): A generalized structure of human platelet having several key
surface receptors with their binding agonists, different granules such as dense-granule and alpha-granule as well as membranous structures like dense tubular system,
open canalicular system, and mitochondria (A). The α-synuclein targets several components of a platelet, including the inhibition of PAR1 mediated platelet ag-
gregation, mitochondrial ETC complex inhibition, and increased ROS production. Several neurotoxic compounds such as MPTP enters platelet via DAT and further
inhibits mitochondrial complexes. Alteration in uptake and storage of dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate also occurs in PD platelet. Platelet carries several anti-
oxidant enzymes, PD-specific microRNAs, 

Chunk 19:
hibition of PAR1 mediated platelet ag-
gregation, mitochondrial ETC complex inhibition, and increased ROS production. Several neurotoxic compounds such as MPTP enters platelet via DAT and further
inhibits mitochondrial complexes. Alteration in uptake and storage of dopamine, serotonin, and glutamate also occurs in PD platelet. Platelet carries several anti-
oxidant enzymes, PD-specific microRNAs, and extracellular vesicles containing α-synuclein. Platelet-rich growth factors from alpha-granules help in neurogenesis in
PD, and various antiplatelet drugs are also proven effective against PD (B). [α-syn, Alpha-synuclein; vWF, von Willebrand factor; TXA2, Thromboxane A2; PAR1,
Protease-activated receptor 1; TXA2R, Thromboxane A2 receptor; NOX, NAD(P)H oxidase; GPx, Glutathione peroxidase; SOD, Superoxide dismutase; XOD, Xanthine
oxidase; CAT, Catalase; GSH, Glutathione; Prx, Peroxiredoxin; Trx1, Thioredoxin 1; MAO-B, Monoamine oxidase B; PINK-1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; LAMP1,
Lysosome-associated membrane protein 2; vGLUT, Vesicular glutamate transporter; VMAT2, Vesicular monoamine transporter 2; ETC, Electron transport chain;
VPS35, Vacuolar protein sorting ortholog 35; PDGF, Platelet-derived growth factor; IGF-1, Insulin-like growth factor 1; FGF, Fibroblast growth factor; BDNF, Brain-
derived neurotrophic factor; VEGF, Vascular endothelial growth factor; TGF-β, Transforming growth factor-β].
receptor-like GPIb-IX-V binds with vWF, and integrin α2β1, GPVI, and (Estevez and Du, 2017). Contrary to the previous reports, the exogenous
GPIV bind with collagen in addition to integrin α5β1 and αIIbβ3, which treatment of α-synuclein potentially inhibited the thrombin- or
bind with fibronectin of the exposed extracellular matrix components ionomycin-induced expression of platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P), a
for platelet adhesion (Ruggeri and Mendolicchio, 2007). In a study, platelet activation marker on purified platelets (Park et al., 2002). Be-
Reheman et al. reported a defe

Chunk 20:
 α5β1 and αIIbβ3, which treatment of α-synuclein potentially inhibited the thrombin- or
bind with fibronectin of the exposed extracellular matrix components ionomycin-induced expression of platelet surface P-selectin (CD62P), a
for platelet adhesion (Ruggeri and Mendolicchio, 2007). In a study, platelet activation marker on purified platelets (Park et al., 2002). Be-
Reheman et al. reported a defective platelet adhesion at the site of sides activation, platelet aggregation is an important parameter in the
vascular injury in α-synuclein deficient mice, thus forming defective disease perspective deciding the fate of a thrombus formation. Platelet
platelet-rich thrombi (Reheman et al., 2010). A defective platelet aggregation is the process where one platelet binds with other platelets,
adhesion often results in altered platelet activation through several which is predominantly mediated by bridging between platelet surface
mechanisms. In a recent study, platelet hyperactivation was demon- receptor, integrin αIIbβ3, via the dimeric adhesive protein fibrinogen
strated to significantly contribute to the hypercoagulability of blood (Jackson, 2007). Thus, platelets form plugs by aggregating to each other
platelets in PD patients as compared to healthy control (Adams et al., and are further associated with activation of the different coagulation
2019). Furthermore, platelet hypercoagulability indicates the tendency cascades resulting in fibrin deposition and cross-linking (van der Meij-
of blood platelets to develop not only thrombus formation but also den and Heemskerk, 2019). It has been reported that ADP- and
thrombus-associated complications in PD (Tashkandi et al., 2018). epinephrine-induced platelet aggregation remains significantly
Nevertheless, the platelet activation is manifested by several soluble decreased in PD patients (Sharma et al., 1991). When the above clinical
circulating agonists like ADP, thromboxane A2 (TXA2), and thrombin. finding was simulated in vitro

Chunk 21:
s been reported that ADP- and
thrombus-associated complications in PD (Tashkandi et al., 2018). epinephrine-induced platelet aggregation remains significantly
Nevertheless, the platelet activation is manifested by several soluble decreased in PD patients (Sharma et al., 1991). When the above clinical
circulating agonists like ADP, thromboxane A2 (TXA2), and thrombin. finding was simulated in vitro, Pontarollo et al. found that exogenous
For example, the ADP released from damaged endothelial cells activates human α-synuclein can also potentially inhibit platelet aggregation by
platelets via platelet receptors P2Y1 and P2Y12, whereas TXA2 regulates interfering with the thrombin/PAR1 functional axis (Fig. 3) (Pontarollo
platelet activation through binding with platelet TXA2 receptor, TP, and et al., 2021). A similar study by Lim et al. have also reported that MPP+,
thrombin via protease-activated receptor (PAR) on the platelet surface a PD-inducing neurotoxin, can trigger the depletion of ATP, thus
6

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
triggering decreased platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma (Lim et al., 2015). Furthermore, the α-synuclein structure in platelet is re-
et al., 2009). Further, platelets also contract their cytoskeleton to shrink ported to be similar to those found in neurons having an N-terminus,
the thrombus called a clot, thus making the completion of hemostasis central region, and C-terminus end (Stefaniuk et al., 2021). Apart from
(van der Meijden and Heemskerk, 2019). In a recent report, the α-synuclein, the human platelets also contain several PD-specific neu-
platelet-mediated clot formation study has revealed that an increased rotransmitters and their receptors. For example, platelets express
clot rate together with an elevated platelet-regulated fibrin cross-linking dopamine, dopamine receptors (Beura et al., 2022), as well as dopamine
as well as a reduced time of thrombus generat

Chunk 22:
α-synuclein, the human platelets also contain several PD-specific neu-
platelet-mediated clot formation study has revealed that an increased rotransmitters and their receptors. For example, platelets express
clot rate together with an elevated platelet-regulated fibrin cross-linking dopamine, dopamine receptors (Beura et al., 2022), as well as dopamine
as well as a reduced time of thrombus generation generally occurs in PD transporters (DAT) identical to that of neuronal origins, which are
patients (Adams et al., 2019). In addition, PD patients are associated associated with the regulation of platelet behavior (Frankhauser et al.,
with a decreased secretion of α-granular contents because of a low 2006). Moreover, nearly 99% of the circulating dopamine is concen-
amount of granules in platelet (Simonidze and Samushia, 2014). trated inside blood platelets in their cytoplasm via DAT. After trans-
Moreover, the decreased degranulation is further confirmed by Park portation into the cytoplasm, the dopamine is further taken up into the
et al., and the same group demonstrated that exogenous α-synuclein dense-granules for storage until it is secreted upon platelet activation
could significantly inhibit the
Ca2+
-dependent release of alpha-granules (Fig. 3) (Osinga et al., 2016). As PD is associated with reduced dopamine
in purified platelets. Still, the release of dense-granules as well as levels in the brain, a reduced dopamine uptake has also been reported by
lysosomal-granules remains unaffected by α-synuclein (Park et al., the storage granules of platelets, which is speculated to be regulated by
2002). The platelet plasma membrane plays an important role in platelet DAT in PD patients (Rabey et al., 1993). The dopamine transport into
secretion for various physiological functions. In a study, it has been dense-granules of platelets is mediated by vesicular monoamine trans-
found that exogenous α-synuclein can enter into platelets and localizes porter 2 (VMAT2), and surpr

Chunk 23:
to be regulated by
2002). The platelet plasma membrane plays an important role in platelet DAT in PD patients (Rabey et al., 1993). The dopamine transport into
secretion for various physiological functions. In a study, it has been dense-granules of platelets is mediated by vesicular monoamine trans-
found that exogenous α-synuclein can enter into platelets and localizes porter 2 (VMAT2), and surprisingly, the VMAT2 mRNA level is reported
itself majorly near the plasma membrane and cytosol like the same in to be decreased in platelets of PD patients (Sala et al., 2010; Osinga et al.,
neurons (Hashimoto et al., 1997; Park et al., 2002). Unlike AD, the 2016). Besides dopamine, dopamine transporters and dopamine re-
membrane fluidity of PD platelets remains unchanged, suggesting the ceptors, platelet also possesses tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), which is the
balanced integrity of the platelet membrane during PD pathoprogression rate-limiting enzyme for the biogenesis of dopamine from tyrosine
(Factor et al., 1994). In an ultrastructure study, Factor et al. reported (Drozdov and Anokhina, 1990). In addition to dopamine, glutamate is
larger platelet vacuoles, which are the part of open canalicular system an important neurotransmitter for memory establishment and dementia,
(OCS) in PD platelets, suggesting an alteration of vesicle trafficking in which is also associated with PD. Platelets express not only glutamate in
platelet (Factor et al., 1994). OCS is an invaginated form of their dense-granules but also the glutamate receptors on their surface
platelet-delimited plasma membrane that helps in intraplatelet cargo (Gautam et al., 2019). It has been reported that an increased glutamate
transport and vesicular trafficking (Twomey et al., 2018). In addition to level is found in platelets of PD patients, but surprisingly the glutamate
this, mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced energy production are the reuptake is confirmed to be decreased in those PD platelets (Ferrarese
evide

Chunk 24:
hat helps in intraplatelet cargo (Gautam et al., 2019). It has been reported that an increased glutamate
transport and vesicular trafficking (Twomey et al., 2018). In addition to level is found in platelets of PD patients, but surprisingly the glutamate
this, mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced energy production are the reuptake is confirmed to be decreased in those PD platelets (Ferrarese
evident phenomena in PD, where the reduced production of ATP due to et al., 1999). This finding suggests that platelet might be synthesizing
decreased activities of mitochondrial complexes is reported (Poewe more amount of glutamate in PD patients on its own, as it is not taking
et al., 2017). Similarly, a reduced maximal electron transport system glutamate from blood plasma. In a study, Bonuccelli et al. demonstrated
(ETS) capacity as well as compromised respiration rates in platelets is that PD is associated with a reduced expression of benzodiazepine re-
observed due to decreased activity of mitochondrial complex I, II, and III ceptors, a part of the GABA receptor complex present on the outer
in platelets of PD patients (Fig. 3) (Haas et al., 1995; Ferrer-Ravento´s membrane of mitochondria (Bonuccelli et al., 1991). Apart from
and Beyer, 2021). Furthermore, a decreased activity of coenzyme Q10 α-synuclein, there are various other PD-specific proteins, which are
(ubiquinone) is also reported in PD platelets accompanied by an stored and secreted from platelets. For example, in a recent study, Lee
increased proportion of oxidized coenzyme Q10 (Behari and Shriv- et al. have reported that parkin (PRKN/PARK2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase is
astava, 2013; Clark et al., 2021). All these platelet-associated changes highly expressed in platelets compared to other tissues, where it helps in
signify the impairment of platelet along with its organelles in PD autophagy, especially mitophagy (Lee et al., 2020). In addition to Par-
patients. kin, another PD-specific protein, PINK1 (PARK6), a mito

Chunk 25:
 parkin (PRKN/PARK2), an E3 ubiquitin ligase is
astava, 2013; Clark et al., 2021). All these platelet-associated changes highly expressed in platelets compared to other tissues, where it helps in
signify the impairment of platelet along with its organelles in PD autophagy, especially mitophagy (Lee et al., 2020). In addition to Par-
patients. kin, another PD-specific protein, PINK1 (PARK6), a mitochondrial
enzyme, can potentially regulate platelet activation, where its deficiency
4.2. Platelet storage contents and secretory components in pathogenesis of could significantly increase platelet activation and thrombosis, thus
PD supporting the earlier finding of increased activation of blood platelets
in PD (Walsh et al., 2018). PINK1 is a serine/threonine-protein kinase
Being a prominent secretory cell, platelet releases various bioactive found in mitochondria, which helps in the quality control of mito-
substances from different storage granules such as alpha-granules, chondrial activity by regulating the degradation of damaged mito-
dense-granules, and lysosomal-granules to mediate a wide array of chondria via mitophagy (Pickrell and Youle, 2015). It is also reported
pathophysiological processes apart from hemostasis, like inflammation, that the PINK1-triggered mitophagy can significantly reduce platelet
angiogenesis, and tissue repair in several diseases (Beura et al., 2022). oxidative stress (Walsh et al., 2018). Moreover platelets are also
The dense-granules are comprised of amine molecules such as serotonin, confirmed to store and express an essential PD-specific protein deglycase
histamine, dopamine, and purines like ATP and ADP, as well as cations DJ1 (PARK7), which functions as an intracellular redox-sensitive
including
Mg2+
,
Ca2+
, etc. Similar to dense-granules, the alpha-granules chaperone as well as an oxidative stress sensor (Shi et al., 2010; Goelz
possess a wide range of protein molecules like growth factors, coagu- et al., 2021). Furthermore, platelet

Chunk 26:
 deglycase
histamine, dopamine, and purines like ATP and ADP, as well as cations DJ1 (PARK7), which functions as an intracellular redox-sensitive
including
Mg2+
,
Ca2+
, etc. Similar to dense-granules, the alpha-granules chaperone as well as an oxidative stress sensor (Shi et al., 2010; Goelz
possess a wide range of protein molecules like growth factors, coagu- et al., 2021). Furthermore, platelets also express an
lation molecules, inflammatory molecules along with hemostatic factors activation-dependent surface glycoprotein, LAMP-2, on their
(Yadav and Storrie, 2017; Heijnen and Van der Sluijs, 2015). In addition, lysosomal-granules as well as dense-granules for degradation of sub-
platelet can uptake different cellular as well as plasma proteins from the strates via the lysosomes, in a process known as chaperone-mediated
blood circulation, thus providing an alternative mechanistic insight into autophagy (CMA) (Silverstein and Febbraio, 1992; Israels et al.,
disease pathogenesis (van der Meijden and Heemskerk, 2019). For 1996). Platelets also have a PD-specific protein, VPS35, on their
example, platelet contains the highest concentration of α-synuclein per lysosomal-granules, which helps in vesicular cargo transport and auto-
milligram of cellular protein in the blood. However, most of these phagy (Rijkers et al., 2017). In a study, Babur et al. searched for the
α-synuclein proteins are found in RBCs, being the most abundant cells in detection of either PD-specific LRRK1 or LRRK2 in platelets but could
the blood (Tashkandi et al., 2018; Pei and Maitta, 2019). The α-synu- not find the same proteins in platelet (Babur et al., 2020). LRRK is a
clein in platelets is reported to be localized into alpha-granules and is cytoplasmic kinase with multiple functional domains, where it interacts
also present in platelet-derived extracellular vesicles, where it regulates with several cytosolic proteins to regulate vesicle endocytosis, cyto-
platelet vesicle transfer and granule

Chunk 27:
ot find the same proteins in platelet (Babur et al., 2020). LRRK is a
clein in platelets is reported to be localized into alpha-granules and is cytoplasmic kinase with multiple functional domains, where it interacts
also present in platelet-derived extracellular vesicles, where it regulates with several cytosolic proteins to regulate vesicle endocytosis, cyto-
platelet vesicle transfer and granule secretion (Pienimaeki-Roemer skeleton maintenance, neurotransmitter release, and their uptake (Klein
7

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
and Westenberger, 2012). Platelets, like neurons, carry monoamine secretes the predominant clinical PD biomarker, α-synuclein, suggesting
oxidase-B (MAO-B), a flavin oxidase found on the outer mitochondrial the potential value of platelet to be used for early disease assessment
membrane that inhibits the arylalkylamine-dependent release of sero- (Tashkandi et al., 2018). A recent finding suggests that α-synuclein in
tonin in platelets, thus enhancing its storage (Bonuccelli et al., 1990). extracellular vesicles of blood plasma may serve as an early diagnostic
Moreover, MAO-B is more likely to generate ROS as a by-product via biomarker for PD (Stuendl et al., 2021). Surprisingly, about 70–90% of
oxidative deamination of several neuroactive amines, including dopa- all circulatory extracellular vesicles are secreted by platelets (Teixeira
mine. In PD, the platelet MAO-B activity was reported to be significantly et al., 2016). These α-synucleins are also reported to be present in
higher (Danielczyk et al., 1988; Zhou et al., 2001), suggesting a theory of platelet-derived extracellular microvesicles (Table 2) (Pei and Maitta,
decreased dopamine in platelet as well as increased ROS, and elevated 2019). PD has been associated with a diminished level of dopamine and
oxidative stress along with subsequent ROS-mediated platelet hyperac- serotonin in the striatum, which is also decreased in 

Chunk 28:
elczyk et al., 1988; Zhou et al., 2001), suggesting a theory of platelet-derived extracellular microvesicles (Table 2) (Pei and Maitta,
decreased dopamine in platelet as well as increased ROS, and elevated 2019). PD has been associated with a diminished level of dopamine and
oxidative stress along with subsequent ROS-mediated platelet hyperac- serotonin in the striatum, which is also decreased in peripheral circu-
tivity. The platelets are also equipped with several key antioxidant en- latory platelets, thus making it a suitable diagnostic model for PD (Stahl,
zymes in order to counter the ROS generation, including glutathione 1977). Apart from dopamine, platelet contains several key PD-specific
peroxidase (GPx), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), perox- miRNAs, including miR-22-3p, miR-146a, and miR-155, and the level
iredoxin (Prx), glutathione (GSH), thioredoxin 1 (Trx1), and thioredoxin of these miRNAs are reported to be elevated in PD platelets (Espino-
reductase (TrxR) (Fig. 3) (Pietraforte et al., 2014; Masselli et al., 2020). sa-Parrilla et al., 2019). Another study has confirmed that a reduced
A reduced activity of SOD (Behari and Shrivastava, 2013), and GPx (De expression of PD-specific miRNAs like miR-128-3p and miR-139-5p are
La Fourniere et al., 2000) is observed in PD platelets, hereby explaining significantly found in PD platelets (Ga´mez-Valero et al., 2021).
a possibility of increased ROS in platelets like as neurons in the brain. Furthermore, several PD-related genes are also identified in peripheral
Further experiments will definitely elucidate more about the antioxidant blood platelets, including WASP Family Homolog 5 Pseudogene
status of blood platelets in PD condition. Hence, it is obvious that (WASH5P), Metastasis-associated Lung Adenocarcinoma Transcript 1
platelet expresses as well as stores several key secretory components, (MALAT1), Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 1A (EEF1A1), and Cathepsin S
which are associated with PD, and an alte

Chunk 29:
ore about the antioxidant blood platelets, including WASP Family Homolog 5 Pseudogene
status of blood platelets in PD condition. Hence, it is obvious that (WASH5P), Metastasis-associated Lung Adenocarcinoma Transcript 1
platelet expresses as well as stores several key secretory components, (MALAT1), Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 1A (EEF1A1), and Cathepsin S
which are associated with PD, and an altered granular secretion of (CTSS), which can be the potential biomarkers for PD diagnosis (Zhang
platelet often occurs during PD. et al., 2021).
5. Theranostic potential of platelet in Parkinson’s disease (PD)
5.2. Platelet as a therapeutic solution for the treatment of Parkinson’s
PD is regarded as a complex disease with a broad spectrum of motor disease
and non-motor symptoms, which require individualized therapeutic
approaches. As each PD patient varies in his/her symptoms, there exists There are several medications available to treat PD, although none
no standard treatment for PD to date. Even after possible treatments, PD can reverse the severity of the illness. These medications can only work
patients report having debilitating response fluctuations, which require to enhance dopamine synthesis, mimic the function of dopamine, or
efficient device-aided therapies aimed to stimulate DA neurons like inhibit dopamine degradation in order to alleviate PD symptoms (Bloem
neurosurgical interventions targeting the areas of basal ganglia, with et al., 2021). Therefore, the replenishment of striatal dopamine defi-
either high-frequency stimulation called as deep brain stimulation and/ ciency via the systemic administration of L-DOPA, the dopamine pre-
or precise lesion surgery (Bloem et al., 2021). The available medications cursor amino acid, represents a gold standard treatment for PD (Poewe
and probable surgery can only relieve the symptoms and maintain a et al., 2017). But the peripheral administration of L-DOPA can be
better quality of life. This is because of the challenges 

Chunk 30:
ency via the systemic administration of L-DOPA, the dopamine pre-
or precise lesion surgery (Bloem et al., 2021). The available medications cursor amino acid, represents a gold standard treatment for PD (Poewe
and probable surgery can only relieve the symptoms and maintain a et al., 2017). But the peripheral administration of L-DOPA can be
better quality of life. This is because of the challenges in early diagnosis, compromised by plasma catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and
as the early motor symptoms in PD appear after the loss of almost 50–60 DOPA decarboxylase (DDC) enzymes, which are responsible for L-DOPA
% of DA neurons in the substantia nigra accompanied by deprivation of metabolism in the circulation before entering into the brain. Hence,
70 % dopamine in the striatum (Ugrumov, 2020). L-DOPA, in combination with COMT inhibitors (Entacapone, Opica-
pone, and Tolcapone) and DDC inhibitor (Carbidopa), is approved by the
5.1. Blood platelet as a peripheral diagnostic model for Parkinson’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of PD (Kalia and
disease Lang, 2015), (Emamzadeh and Surguchov, 2018). Apart from these, the
other FDA approved therapeutic treatment for PD includes dopamine
Although PD has no definitive test for a clear diagnosis, it is partially agonists (e.g., Pramipexole, Ropinirole, Rotigotine, and Apomorphine)
diagnosed on the basis of clinical criteria. In clinical practice, the to mimic the effect of dopamine in DA neurons, MAO-B inhibitors
strategy for diagnosis includes the presence of multiple cardinal motor (Selegiline, Rasagiline, and Safinamide) to reduce dopamine degrada-
symptoms along with associated and exclusionary symptoms and tion and ROS formation (Armstrong and Okun, 2020; Poewe et al., 2017)
response to levodopa (L-DOPA) (Bloem et al., 2021). The gold standard serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist (Pimavanserin) to reduce hallu-
for PD diagnosis is the neuropathological assessment that utilizes neu- cinations and d

Chunk 31:
nd Safinamide) to reduce dopamine degrada-
symptoms along with associated and exclusionary symptoms and tion and ROS formation (Armstrong and Okun, 2020; Poewe et al., 2017)
response to levodopa (L-DOPA) (Bloem et al., 2021). The gold standard serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist (Pimavanserin) to reduce hallu-
for PD diagnosis is the neuropathological assessment that utilizes neu- cinations and delusions, and adenosine A2A receptor antagonist (Istra-
roimaging techniques to decipher DA neuronal death and dopamine defylline) (Emamzadeh and Surguchov, 2018; Sivanandy et al., 2021) to
deficiency. The potential candidate imaging markers include positron enhance the secretion of GABA (Fig. 4). Besides these well-established
emission tomography (PET) or single-photon emission computed to- drugs, new add-on medications can be helpful to counter various
mography (SPECT) methods to evaluate the decreased projection of PD-associated complications and risk factors such as CVDs. Among such,
SNpc-DA nerve terminals to the striatum (Kalia and Lang, 2015). antiplatelet drugs can be the possible alternate options, which could be
However, studies have assessed several clinical, biochemical, and ge- used along with the frontline drugs for better disease management.
netic biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as well as blood for the
early detection of PD. For example, the differential levels of α-synuclein 5.2.1. Potential antiplatelet drugs as therapeutic options for Parkinson’s
in the blood can be a useful breakthrough for risk prediction in screening disease
and diagnosis for measuring the progression of PD and evaluating its There are numerous antiplatelet drugs that are used in several CVDs
potential therapeutic regimes (Poewe et al., 2017). Therefore, platelet as intended to reduce the risk of thrombosis and associated complications.
a circulatory blood component can be used as a peripheral cellular These drugs affect several platelet signaling cascades and inhibit platelet


Chunk 32:
 the progression of PD and evaluating its There are numerous antiplatelet drugs that are used in several CVDs
potential therapeutic regimes (Poewe et al., 2017). Therefore, platelet as intended to reduce the risk of thrombosis and associated complications.
a circulatory blood component can be used as a peripheral cellular These drugs affect several platelet signaling cascades and inhibit platelet
model for the early diagnosis of PD like that of AD earlier. In AD, platelet activation as well as aggregation (Fig. 4) (Michelson, 2010). Few such
has been proposed to store and secrete several key AD-specific mole- drugs are described below, having a probable efficacy in PD by lowering
cules, which can be used not only as diagnostic molecules but also as neurotoxicity and promoting neurogenesis in both in vitro as well as in
therapeutic options (Veitinger et al., 2014). However, platelet stores and vivo PD models (Table 2).
8

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Fig. 4. Schematic overview of the platelet-associated theranostic solutions for the management of Parkinson’s disease (PD): Platelet is considered a pe-
ripheral cellular model for PD, as it shares significant similarities with a dopaminergic (DA) neuron. For example, platelet contains α-synuclein, parkin, DJ-1, PINK-1,
BDNF, Reelin, VPS35, LAMP1, VMAT-1, dopamine, serotonin, DAT, TH, etc. These striking resemblance makes platelet a suitable surrogate system to study more
about the mechanism of PD pathoprogression and the development of novel therapeutic candidates for PD. Several FDA-approved drugs have been used to restore
dopamine levels inside a DA neuron for the management of PD, including L-DOPA, Carbidopa, Tolcapone, Safinamide, Selegiline, etc. (A). Antiplatelet drugs have
been used for a long time to prevent thrombus formation by inhibiting platelet activation and aggregation, targeting several key platelet agonist receptors as well as
downstream sig

Chunk 33:
or PD. Several FDA-approved drugs have been used to restore
dopamine levels inside a DA neuron for the management of PD, including L-DOPA, Carbidopa, Tolcapone, Safinamide, Selegiline, etc. (A). Antiplatelet drugs have
been used for a long time to prevent thrombus formation by inhibiting platelet activation and aggregation, targeting several key platelet agonist receptors as well as
downstream signaling pathways. Few drugs like Celastrol, Aspirin, Prasugrel, Ticagrelor, Cilostazol, Dipyridamole, Mitoquinone, etc., are shown with their mech-
anism of action to inhibit platelet activation and subsequent thrombus formation (B). [MAO-B, Monoamine oxidase B; PINK-1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; LAMP1,
Lysosome-associated membrane protein 2; vGLUT, Vesicular glutamate transporter; VMAT2, Vesicular monoamine transporter 2; VPS35, Vacuolar protein sorting
ortholog 35; PAR1/12, Protease-activated receptors 1/12; APP, Amyloid precursor protein; DAT, Dopamine transporter; BDNF, Brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
LAT, L-amino acid transporter; TXA2, Thromboxane A2; TP, TXA2 receptor; IP, PGI2 receptor; PAF, Platelet-activating factor; TSP, Thrombospondin; PDGF, Platelet-
derived growth factor; DDC, DOPA decarboxylase; COMT, Catechol-O-methyltransferase; TH, Tyrosine hydroxylase; NOX, NAD(P)H oxidase; DOPAC, 3, 4-Dihydrox-
yphenylacetic acid; 3-OMD, 3-O-methyldopa; NBP, 3-N-butylphthalide].
9

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Table 1
Structural, functional & secretory alteration of platelet in Parkinson’s disease: A detailed description of alterations of platelet structural and functional pa-
rameters accompanied by platelet organelle dysfunction as well as dysregulated secretion of PD specific proteins from platelet.
Category Parameters/Factors Contributions in PD Refs.
Platelet structural Platelet count PD has been correlated with a change in platelet count. Plate count was (Machaczka et al., 1999; Behari and
alterations rep

Chunk 34:
on of alterations of platelet structural and functional pa-
rameters accompanied by platelet organelle dysfunction as well as dysregulated secretion of PD specific proteins from platelet.
Category Parameters/Factors Contributions in PD Refs.
Platelet structural Platelet count PD has been correlated with a change in platelet count. Plate count was (Machaczka et al., 1999; Behari and
alterations reported to be decreased in the case of PD patients. Shrivastava, 2013; Koçer et al., 2013)
PD patients are not associated with a low platelet count. (Sharma et al., 1991)
Platelet size PD is being correlated with an abnormal platelet size, where a larger size (Simonidze and Samushia, 2014; Tashkandi
is observed in PD patients and a smaller size in α-synuclein deficient mice. et al., 2018; Pei and Maitta, 2019)
Platelet shape PD is associated with an altered platelet shape. More membrane extension (Simonidze and Samushia, 2014; Pei and
is observed in PD platelets. A minimum invagination and distorted shape Maitta, 2019; Adams et al., 2019)
are observed in PD patients.
Platelet volume PD is being correlated with a change in platelet volume. PD patients (Koçer et al., 2013; Ferrer-Ravento´s and
usually have an increased platelet volume compared to both AD patients Beyer, 2021)
as well as control individuals.
Mean platelet volume (MPV) MPV demonstrates the size of platelets. MPV was significantly elevated in (Koçer et al., 2013; Geyik et al., 2016;
PD patients as compared with healthy individuals, and an absence of Tashkandi et al., 2018)
α-synuclein leads to lower MPV.
Platelet functional Adhesion Platelet adhesion is the first and pivotal platelet functional parameter. (Reheman et al., 2010)
impairment Defective platelet adhesion was observed at the site of blood-vessel injury
leading to a defective thrombus formation in α-synuclein deficient mice.
Activation Platelet hyperactivity, and increased spreading, are observed in PD (Adams et al., 2019)
patients in comparison to healt

Chunk 35:
al Adhesion Platelet adhesion is the first and pivotal platelet functional parameter. (Reheman et al., 2010)
impairment Defective platelet adhesion was observed at the site of blood-vessel injury
leading to a defective thrombus formation in α-synuclein deficient mice.
Activation Platelet hyperactivity, and increased spreading, are observed in PD (Adams et al., 2019)
patients in comparison to healthy controls. But at the same time, a
reduced platelet activation has been described in PD.
Aggregation Platelet aggregation induced by ADP and epinephrine was observed to be (Sharma et al., 1991; Lim et al., 2009;
significantly reduced in PD patients. Both MPP+, a PD inducing Pontarollo et al., 2021)
compound as well as α-synuclein also inhibit platelet aggregation.
Degranulation Exogenous α-synuclein inhibits thrombin- or ionomycin-induced alpha- (Park et al., 2002; Simonidze and Samushia,
granule release from platelets but remains ineffective for dense-granule 2014)
and lysosomal-granule. A low amount of α-granules are reported to be
released from platelets in PD patients.
Platelet organelle Plasma membrane Platelet membrane fluidity remains unchanged in PD patients, but the (Factor et al., 1994; Hashimoto et al., 1997;
dysfunctions membrane and adjacent areas are essential for the localization of Park et al., 2002)
α-synuclein.
Mitochondrial system Platelet mitochondrial is the primary vulnerable organelle in PD patients, (Haas et al., 1995; Behari and Shrivastava,
where reduced respiration rate, and ATP production occurs due to 2013; Ferrer-Ravento´s and Beyer, 2021;
decreased activity of platelet mitochondrial complex-I, II, III as well as Clark et al., 2021)
coenzyme Q10.
Open canalicular system OCS is the primary route of transport of cargo and vesicular trafficking in (Factor et al., 1994)
(OCS) platelets, where platelet vacuoles, the part of OCS were observed to be
larger in PD.
Ubiquitin proteasomal Alteration of platelet UPS is controversial, but parkin, an E3 ub

Chunk 36:
activity of platelet mitochondrial complex-I, II, III as well as Clark et al., 2021)
coenzyme Q10.
Open canalicular system OCS is the primary route of transport of cargo and vesicular trafficking in (Factor et al., 1994)
(OCS) platelets, where platelet vacuoles, the part of OCS were observed to be
larger in PD.
Ubiquitin proteasomal Alteration of platelet UPS is controversial, but parkin, an E3 ubiquitin (Lee et al., 2020)
system (UPS) ligase as well as a PD biomarker is highly expressed in blood platelets as
compared to other tissues, which helps in mitophagy.
Platelet storage & Alpha-synuclein (α-syn) Platelets contain the highest amount of α-synuclein per milligram of (Park et al., 2002; Tashkandi et al., 2018; Pei
secretory cellular protein in the blood. It stores these proteins inside the cytoplasm and Maitta, 2019; Stefaniuk et al., 2021)
components and other compartments. It is also found to be secreted in platelet
extracellular vesicles into circulation.
Dopamine (DA) & Dopamine Platelets store about 99% of the circulatory dopamine in their dense- (Rabey et al., 1993; Osinga et al., 2016;
transporter (DAT) granules and secrete it upon activation. Platelets also express dopamine Beura et al., 2022)
receptors as well as the transporter, DAT. A decreased dopamine uptake
by platelet storage granules is observed in PD.
Glutamate (Glu) & Platelets express not only glutamate in their dense-granules but also the (Ferrarese et al., 1999; Gautam et al., 2019)
Glutamate receptor (GlutR) glutamate receptors on their surfaces. Although an increased level of
glutamate is found in platelets of PD patients, the glutamate uptake
remains reduced in PD platelets.
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) PD is associated with a decreased expression of benzodiazepine receptors, (Bonuccelli et al., 1991)
a part of the GABA receptor complex present on the outer mitochondrial
membrane of the platelet.
Monoamine oxidase B (MAO- MAO-B mediates the production of ROS as a side product via oxidative 

Chunk 37:
 platelets of PD patients, the glutamate uptake
remains reduced in PD platelets.
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) PD is associated with a decreased expression of benzodiazepine receptors, (Bonuccelli et al., 1991)
a part of the GABA receptor complex present on the outer mitochondrial
membrane of the platelet.
Monoamine oxidase B (MAO- MAO-B mediates the production of ROS as a side product via oxidative (Bonuccelli et al., 1990; Danielczyk et al.,
B) deamination of several cellular molecules. The platelet MAO-B activity is 1988; Zhou et al., 2001)
reported to be significantly higher in patients with PD.
Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) TH is the crucial rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of (Drozdov and Anokhina, 1990)
tyrosine into L-DOPA in the dopamine biosynthesis pathway. Platelets are
also reported to be equipped with TH.
Parkin (PRKN) Parkin is an essential E3 ubiquitin ligase that helps in mitophagy and (Lee et al., 2020)
inhibits apoptosis. Parkin is highly expressed in blood platelets.
Vesicular monoamine VMAT2 helps in the cytoplasmic uptake of monoamine neurotransmitters (Sala et al., 2010)
transporter 2 (VMAT2) like dopamine and serotonin into dense-granules of the platelet. VMAT2
mRNA levels are reported to be reduced in platelets in PD patients.
Vacuolar protein sorting- VPS35 helps in cargo transport from Golgi and helps in autophagy. (Rijkers et al., 2017)
associated protein 35 Platelet lysosomal-granules are reported to carry VPS35.
(VPS35)
PTEN-induced kinase 1 PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase that helps in protecting mitochondrial (Walsh et al., 2018)
(PINK1) stress-induced apoptosis. It along with parkin helps in mitophagy. PINK1
deficiency causes increased platelet activation, suggesting the theory of
PINK1-driven mitophagy in alleviating platelet stress.
(continued on next page)
10

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Table 1 (continued)
Category Parameters/Factors Contributions in PD Re

Chunk 38:
PINK1) stress-induced apoptosis. It along with parkin helps in mitophagy. PINK1
deficiency causes increased platelet activation, suggesting the theory of
PINK1-driven mitophagy in alleviating platelet stress.
(continued on next page)
10

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Table 1 (continued)
Category Parameters/Factors Contributions in PD Refs.
Lysosomal associated LAMP2 is a lysosomal membrane glycoprotein, that is confirmed to be (Silverstein and Febbraio, 1992; Israels et al.,
membrane protein-2 (LAMP- present both on lysosomal-granules and dense-granules of the platelet. It 1996)
2) is an activation-dependent platelet surface glycoprotein.
Deglycase 1 (DJ1) DJ1 is an oxidative stress sensor that helps in the proper folding of (Shi et al., 2010; Goelz et al., 2021)
α-synuclein and further inhibits its aggregation. Platelet is reported to
store and express DJ1.
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 LRRK2 is an essential cellular protein that helps in mitochondrial (Babur et al., 2020)
(LRRK2) functioning, vesicle trafficking, endocytosis, and autophagy. The
proteomics experiments did not detect any LRRK2 in platelets.
Antioxidants (SOD & GPx) Antioxidants help in scavenging the excess ROS produced in the cell (Behari and Shrivastava, 2013; De La
during PD. Reduced activity of SOD and GPx is observed in PD platelets Fourniere et al., 2000)
explaining a possibility of increased ROS in platelets like neurons in the
brain.
Table 2
Diagnostic & therapeutic applications of platelet in Parkinson’s disease: A detailed description of the potential PD-specific biomarkers for early diagnosis, along
with the therapeutic effects of different antiplatelet drugs, and platelet-secreted growth factors ameliorating PD.
Category Subject Findings Ref.
Diagnosis Platelet proteins & Platelet extracellular vesicles (EVs) contribute about 70–90% of all circulating EVs. As (Teixeira et al., 2016; Stuendl et al.,
RNAs for PD diagnosis α-synuc

Chunk 39:
 the potential PD-specific biomarkers for early diagnosis, along
with the therapeutic effects of different antiplatelet drugs, and platelet-secreted growth factors ameliorating PD.
Category Subject Findings Ref.
Diagnosis Platelet proteins & Platelet extracellular vesicles (EVs) contribute about 70–90% of all circulating EVs. As (Teixeira et al., 2016; Stuendl et al.,
RNAs for PD diagnosis α-synuclein is found in platelet EVs, the concentration of α-synuclein in platelet EVs may 2021)
function as a potential diagnostic biomarker for PD.
The peripheral blood platelets are rich in WASH5P, MALAT1, EEF1A1 , and CTSS, which may (Zhang et al., 2021)
contribute to being promising biomarkers for an effective and accurate diagnosis for PD in the
future.
Elevated blood expression of the platelet-related miRNAs miR-22-3p, miR-146a and miR-155 (Espinosa-Parrilla et al., 2019)
are found to be plausible biomarkers for an early diagnosis of PD.
Attenuated blood expression of the platelet-related miRNAs like hsa-miR-128-3p and hsa- (G´amez-Valero et al., 2021)
miR-139-5p are potential biomarkers for the early detection of PD.
Therapeutics Antiplatelet drugs for Aspirin Aspirin inhibits platelet COX enzymes, thus inhibiting the TXA2-mediated (Majithia and Bhatt, 2019;
PD treatment platelet aggregation as well as platelet-regulated secretion of ROS. It is Thrash-Williams et al., 2016; Fyfe,
being reported to inhibit mitochondrial dysfunction, scavenge ROS 2020)
besides improving the movement impairment in PD conditions.
Ticagrelor Ticagrelor inhibits platelet via non-competitive as well as reversible (Michelson, 2010; Yamauchi et al.,
inhibition of platelet P2Y12 receptor. It inhibits neuroinflammation and 2017; Li et al., 2022)
improves cerebral blood flow, and exhibits neuroprotection.
Cilostazol Cilostazol inhibits platelet aggregation via the cAMP-PKA mediated (Sun et al., 2002; Hedya et al., 2018)
signaling pathway. It upregulates the Nurr1 expression, as well as SIRT-
1/autopha

Chunk 40:
eversible (Michelson, 2010; Yamauchi et al.,
inhibition of platelet P2Y12 receptor. It inhibits neuroinflammation and 2017; Li et al., 2022)
improves cerebral blood flow, and exhibits neuroprotection.
Cilostazol Cilostazol inhibits platelet aggregation via the cAMP-PKA mediated (Sun et al., 2002; Hedya et al., 2018)
signaling pathway. It upregulates the Nurr1 expression, as well as SIRT-
1/autophagy, and GSK-3β/apoptosis cross-regulation in PD rats.
Celastrol Celastrol potentially inhibits ADP and thrombin-induced adhesion, (Hu et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2019)
activation, and aggregation of the platelet. It inhibits mitochondrial
damage, as well as promotes the reduction of neuroinflammation besides
suppressing motor impairment in PD.
Prasugrel Prasugrel inhibits platelet via irreversible and competitive inhibition of (Majithia and Bhatt, 2019; Ohno
platelet P2Y12 receptor. It potentially reduces oxidative stress, abates et al., 2016; Gomaa et al., 2021)
neuroinflammation, activates neurogenesis, and improves memory
functioning.
Nobiletin Nobiletin inhibits platelet aggregation via inhibition of PLCγ2-PKC and (Jayakumar et al., 2017; Yabuki et al.,
Akt/MAPK pathways. It also rescues motor and cognitive dysfunctions in 2014; Jeong et al., 2015)
PD mice by inhibiting glial activation and subsequent neuroinflammation
and further enhances the secretion of dopamine in the striatum.
Quercetin Quercetin inhibits platelet via inhibiting COX-1 signaling and the cAMP/ (Beura et al., 2021; Tamtaji et al.,
PLA2 pathway. It decreases α-synuclein aggregation, increases 2020; Madiha et al., 2021)
antioxidant status, and reduces the expression of neuroinflammatory
molecules in PD.
Dipyridamole Dipyridamole is a PDE inhibitor that inhibits the adhesion and (Kim and Liao, 2008;
aggregation of platelet in a NO-mediated pathway. It can attenuate Rodríguez-Pallares et al., 2002;
oxidative stress and promotes the expression of TH in PD. Ho¨llerhage et al., 2017)
3-N- 3-n-butylphthalide re

Chunk 41:
, 2021)
antioxidant status, and reduces the expression of neuroinflammatory
molecules in PD.
Dipyridamole Dipyridamole is a PDE inhibitor that inhibits the adhesion and (Kim and Liao, 2008;
aggregation of platelet in a NO-mediated pathway. It can attenuate Rodríguez-Pallares et al., 2002;
oxidative stress and promotes the expression of TH in PD. Ho¨llerhage et al., 2017)
3-N- 3-n-butylphthalide reduces platelet activation via inhibition of cPLA2- (Ye et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2010;
butylphthalide mediated TXA2 synthesis. It suppresses oxidative stress, mitochondrial Chen et al., 2018)
damage, α-synuclein aggregation besides augmenting neuronal
antioxidant enzymes in PD.
Mitoquionone Mitoquinone inhibits adhesion, activation, and aggregation of platelets (M´endez et al., 2020; M´endez; Xi
by decreasing the secretion of ATP induced by TRAP-6. It can reduce the et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2020)
generation of ROS, inhibits mitochondrial damage, and apoptosis, thus
protecting DA neurons in PD.
Platelet-secreted Endoret containing platelet-secreted growth factors resulted in a decreased (Anitua et al., 2015)
growth factors for PD neuroinflammation, and improved motor performance by the significant reduction in NF-κB
treatment activation, NO, COX-2, and TNF-α expression in the substantia nigra of PD mice.
Heat-treated platelet pellet lysates prevented MPP+induced LUHMES neuronal death by (Chou et al., 2017)
downregulating neuroinflammation in PD mice via inhibiting COX-2.
Heat-treated human platelet lysates enhanced the expression of TH and neuron-specific (Nebie et al., 2019)
enolase (NSE) in LUHMES cells and rescued them from neuronal death.
The human platelet lysate prevents MPP+induced LUHMES neuronal death by activating (Gouel et al., 2017)
specific signaling cascade i.e. the Akt pathway and, to a smaller extent, the MEK pathway.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
5.2.1.1. Aspirin. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic a

Chunk 42:
lase (NSE) in LUHMES cells and rescued them from neuronal death.
The human platelet lysate prevents MPP+induced LUHMES neuronal death by activating (Gouel et al., 2017)
specific signaling cascade i.e. the Akt pathway and, to a smaller extent, the MEK pathway.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
5.2.1.1. Aspirin. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is an excellent option 5.2.1.6. Nobiletin. Nobiletin is an antiplatelet flavone that can effi-
targeting both platelet and neuron as it irreversibly inhibits the platelet ciently reduce platelet aggregation via inhibition of PLCγ2-PKC and Akt/
COX enzyme, thus inhibiting the synthesis of TXA2, which causes MAPK pathways (Jayakumar et al., 2017). In a study, Jeong et al.
+
platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction. Moreover, small doses of confirmed that nobiletin administration into MPP -induced PD rats
aspirin are required for COX-1 blockade, and high doses can inhibit rescued not only DA neurons of substantia nigra, but also inhibited
COX-2 (Majithia and Bhatt, 2019). A research finding by Thrash et al. microglial activation and subsequently preserved the expression of
demonstrated that salicylate significantly reduced glia-cell derived neurotrophic factor (Jeong et al., 2015). Another study
methamphetamine-induced DA neuronal death by inhibiting mito- by Yabuki et al. also observed a similar effect of nobiletin, where it
chondrial dysfunction and scavenged ROS, besides improving the restored the CaMKII-cAMP-PKA-dependent TH level and maintained
movement impairment in PD conditions (Thrash-Williams et al., 2016). dopamine concentration as well as calcium mobilization in the striatal
In recent research, Fyfe et al. also suggested the potential role of aspirin area and hippocampal CA1 region (Yabuki et al., 2014). Therefore,
as a therapeutic option for reducing the risk of LRRK2-manifested PD nobiletin could be a suitable candidate for the therapeutic treatment of
(Fyf

Chunk 43:
ditions (Thrash-Williams et al., 2016). dopamine concentration as well as calcium mobilization in the striatal
In recent research, Fyfe et al. also suggested the potential role of aspirin area and hippocampal CA1 region (Yabuki et al., 2014). Therefore,
as a therapeutic option for reducing the risk of LRRK2-manifested PD nobiletin could be a suitable candidate for the therapeutic treatment of
(Fyfe, 2020). PD.
5.2.1.2. Ticagrelor. Ticagrelor is a potent antiplatelet drug that func- 5.2.1.7. Quercetin. Quercetin is a natural flavonoid and a potent
tions as a non-competitive, reversible cyclopentyl triazolopyrimidine platelet antagonist that inhibits platelet via regulation of the cAMP/
P2Y12 receptor antagonist (Michelson, 2010). In a recent study by PLA2 pathway and downregulation of intracellular
Ca2+
mobilization,
Yamauchi et al., it is established that ticagrelor inhibits neuro- IL-6, IL-1β, in addition to an inhibition of COX-1 (Beura et al., 2021).
inflammation by attenuating microglial activation, apart from Tamtaji et al. discussed the neuroprotective effects of quercetin, which
improving cerebral blood flow and neuroprotection via phosphorylation include the decrease in α-synuclein aggregation, amelioration of
of eNOS and ERK1/2 (Yamauchi et al., 2017). As stroke is considered a impaired autophagy and antioxidant status, and a reduced expression of
prominent vascular risk factor for the development of PD, ticagrelor is neuroinflammatory molecules like TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β in PD models
proposed to reduce the risk of vascular complications, including stroke (Tamtaji et al., 2020). In a recent study, Madiha et al. reported that
as well as dementia in PD patients (Li et al., 2022). Hence, ticagrelor quercetin could attenuate oxidative stress and significantly improves
could be a novel therapeutic candidate for the treatment of PD. motor and cognitive functions by restoring the dopamine level in
rotenone-induced PD rats, thereby proposing it to be used as a pot

Chunk 44:
 et al., 2020). In a recent study, Madiha et al. reported that
as well as dementia in PD patients (Li et al., 2022). Hence, ticagrelor quercetin could attenuate oxidative stress and significantly improves
could be a novel therapeutic candidate for the treatment of PD. motor and cognitive functions by restoring the dopamine level in
rotenone-induced PD rats, thereby proposing it to be used as a potential
5.2.1.3. Cilostazol. Cilostazol is a potent antiplatelet drug that selec- therapeutic option for the treatment of PD (Madiha et al., 2021).
tively inhibits phosphodiesterase 3 (PDE3), thus inducing intracellular
concentration of cAMP, and further regulates cAMP/PKA-mediated in- 5.2.1.8. Dipyridamole. Dipyridamole is an effective inhibitor of cGMP-
hibition of platelet aggregation as well as activation (Sun et al., 2002). In dependent PDE and an adenosine transporter. In addition to this, the
a study, Hedya et al. confirmed that cilostazol could attenuate neuro- same compound can also reduce platelet adhesion as well as platelet
inflammation via inhibiting GSK-3β-mediated activation of proin- aggregation in a NO-mediated pathway (Kim and Liao, 2008). In a study,
flammatory molecules like Nf-κβ, TNF-α, and IL-1β. They also proved Rodríguez-Pallares et al., confirmed that dipyridamole could attenuate
that cilostazol could potentially upregulate Nurr1 expression, resulting oxidative stress and promoted the expression of TH, an essential enzyme
in the preservation of DA neurons, as well as improving the motor ac- for dopamine biosynthesis. It also triggered the neurogenesis of DA
tivity along with an increase in striatal TH content in PD rats (Hedya neurons from EGF-responsive mesencephalic precursors (Rodrí-
et al., 2018). This study suggests that cilostazol could be a potential drug guez-Pallares et al., 2002). In a recent report, Ho¨llerhage et al. reported
solution for the therapeutic treatment of PD. that dipyridamole could rescue from neuronal death by reducing the


Chunk 45:

tivity along with an increase in striatal TH content in PD rats (Hedya neurons from EGF-responsive mesencephalic precursors (Rodrí-
et al., 2018). This study suggests that cilostazol could be a potential drug guez-Pallares et al., 2002). In a recent report, Ho¨llerhage et al. reported
solution for the therapeutic treatment of PD. that dipyridamole could rescue from neuronal death by reducing the
release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) from α-synuclein overexpressing
5.2.1.4. Celastrol. Celastrol is an antiplatelet drug that inhibits ADP- LUHMES neurons, suggesting the potential effect of this drug as a
induced expression of P-selectin (CD62p), a platelet activation marker, therapeutic candidate for PD treatment (Ho¨llerhage et al., 2017).
and integrin αIIbβ3 activation, thus affecting platelet adhesion as well as
platelet aggregation (Hu et al., 2009). In a recent study, Lin et al. 5.2.1.9. 3-N-butylphthalide. 3-N-butylphthalide (NBP) is a potent anti-
confirmed that celastrol ameliorates autophagy impairment by upre- platelet drug that inhibits platelet activation via inhibition of cPLA2-
gulating autophagosome proteins like Atg7, Atg12, LC-II, Beclin1, and mediated production of TXA2 as well as PDE (Ye et al., 2015). In a
VPS34, in addition to promoting mitophagy by upregulating the study by Huang et al., NBP was reported to suppress oxidative stress,
expression of PINK1 and DJ-1. The same group also proved that celastrol mitochondrial damage, and α-synuclein accumulation, besides aug-
+ +
triggers the rescue of MPP -induced death of DA neurons by inhibiting menting neuronal antioxidant GSH level in an MPP -induced cellular
mitochondrial damage, as well as a reduction in neuroinflammation, model of PD (Huang et al., 2010). In a later study, Chen et al. demon-
besides suppressing motor impairment in the PD model (Lin et al., strated that NBP could reduce the neurotoxicity in an LPS-induced PD
2019). Therefore, celastrol could be a potential medication for the mouse

Chunk 46:
nal antioxidant GSH level in an MPP -induced cellular
mitochondrial damage, as well as a reduction in neuroinflammation, model of PD (Huang et al., 2010). In a later study, Chen et al. demon-
besides suppressing motor impairment in the PD model (Lin et al., strated that NBP could reduce the neurotoxicity in an LPS-induced PD
2019). Therefore, celastrol could be a potential medication for the mouse by promoting the dopaminergic expression of TH, thus
therapeutic treatment of PD. decreasing the nuclear deposition of α-synuclein, mitigating microglia
activation, in addition to the improvement in PD symptoms, like
5.2.1.5. Prasugrel. Prasugrel is another antiplatelet drug that functions dyskinesia (Chen et al., 2018). These findings propose NBP to be used as
as an irreversible, competitive, thienopyridine P2Y12 receptor antago- a potential drug candidate for the management of PD.
nist (Majithia and Bhatt, 2019). In a recent study by Gomaa et al., it is
reported that prasugrel can potentially reduce oxidative stress, abate 5.2.1.10. Mitoquinone. Mitoquinone (MitoQ) is an antiplatelet drug
neuroinflammation, activate neurogenesis, and improve memory func- that inhibits the adhesion, activation, and aggregation of human plate-
tioning by activating the cAMP/PKA/CREB/BDNF pathway in mouse lets by decreasing the secretion of ATP induced by thrombin receptor
models (Gomaa et al., 2021). Gait impairment is considered a prominent activator peptide-6 (TRAP-6) (M´endez et al., 2020). In a finding, Xi et al.
motor symptom of PD, and Ohno et al., reported that prasugrel reported that MitoQ could reduce the generation of ROS and could
improved abnormal gait by improving cerebral blood flow, suggesting it potentially inhibit mitochondrial damage and neuronal apoptosis. It
to be used as a potential therapeutic candidate for PD (Ohno et al., protects DA neurons by activating PGC-1α to promote MFN2-dependent
2016). mitochondrial fusion in the 6-OHDA-induced PD model (Xi et al., 2018).
1

Chunk 47:
 could reduce the generation of ROS and could
improved abnormal gait by improving cerebral blood flow, suggesting it potentially inhibit mitochondrial damage and neuronal apoptosis. It
to be used as a potential therapeutic candidate for PD (Ohno et al., protects DA neurons by activating PGC-1α to promote MFN2-dependent
2016). mitochondrial fusion in the 6-OHDA-induced PD model (Xi et al., 2018).
12

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
In a later report, Kim et al. confirmed that MitoQ could improve motor potentially be the add-on medications or co-treatments that can be used
function by ameliorating mitochondrial functions, thus reducing the as adjuvants with established classical drugs to increase the efficacy of
+
death of DA neurons in the MPP -induced mice model for PD (Kim et al., already existing drugs for better PD management. The most obvious
2020). This suggests the potential efficacy of MitoQ to be used as a challenge in the application of single or dual antiplatelet regimens is the
possible therapeutic drug candidate for PD. magnitude of inhibition of platelet, as platelet is indispensable for the
growth and proliferation of damaged tissues. Platelet is a repository of
5.2.2. Platelet growth factors as therapeutic candidates for Parkinson’s various growth factors, which can enable faster neuroregeneration;
disease hence complete platelet inhibition should not be recommended. The
Besides the diagnosis aspect, blood platelets have also been used for a most critical aspect will be the signaling via which platelet releases its
long time in wound healing and tissue engineering owing to their unique granular growth factors and the signaling through which antiplatelet
collection of growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factors drugs elicit their mode of action (Fig. 4.). Moreover, the prolonged use of
(BDNF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor these antiplatelet drugs 

Chunk 48:
et releases its
long time in wound healing and tissue engineering owing to their unique granular growth factors and the signaling through which antiplatelet
collection of growth factors such as brain-derived neurotrophic factors drugs elicit their mode of action (Fig. 4.). Moreover, the prolonged use of
(BDNF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor these antiplatelet drugs could potentially cause the intracerebral
(PDGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast bleeding issue, as seen in several diseases, which needs to be optimized
growth factor (bFGF), and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) as well as in a controlled manner. The platelets are also a key source of several
regulators of synaptogenesis like reelin and ephrins (Fig. 3) (Beura et al., immunomodulatory molecules that could potentially trigger inflamma-
2022). In one study, it is found that platelet-rich plasma (PRP) promotes tion. Therefore, the formulated platelet lysate could induce a severe
axon growth by potentiating the improvement of oligodendrogenesis, immune response in the recipient patient if not radically controlled.
remyelination, and functional abilities in the multiple sclerosis (MS) Hence, the platelet factors should be contamination-free along with
mouse model. The PRP treatment subsequently attenuated the number having a low immunogenicity property to be considered the successful
of astrocytes, microglia, and infiltrating inflammatory cells, as well as candidates for PD treatment. The local controlled release of antiplatelet
the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (Borhani-Haghighi and drugs and platelet-rich growth factors needs special attention from
Mohamadi, 2019). Several studies have also reported that nanotechnology, where fabricated nanomaterials are better options in
Endoret-containing platelet-secreted growth factors can enhance the the future, which could be proven as a requisite for specific drug delivery
activation of neuronal p

Chunk 49:
atory cytokines (Borhani-Haghighi and drugs and platelet-rich growth factors needs special attention from
Mohamadi, 2019). Several studies have also reported that nanotechnology, where fabricated nanomaterials are better options in
Endoret-containing platelet-secreted growth factors can enhance the the future, which could be proven as a requisite for specific drug delivery
activation of neuronal progenitor cells, enhancing the hippocampal vehicles as well as formulated bio-scaffolds for platelet-rich growth
neurogenesis process, hence reducing the Aβ-induced neuro- factors for the treatment of PD.
degeneration in an AD mouse model (Anitua et al., 2013). These
platelet-derived growth factors can modulate astrocyte activation, 7. Conclusion
reducing inflammatory responses, and promoting Aβ degradation, in
addition to the symptomatic improvements in anxiety, learning, and Due to an increased number of aging-related diseases and concomi-
memory in AD mice (Anitua et al., 2014). Similar to the above findings tantly elevated prevalence of PD in the world population, the need for its
in AD, Endoret-containing platelet-secreted growth factors also resulted efficient management is requisite. Nevertheless, there is no substitute for
in mitigating inflammatory responses and improved motor performance the precise diagnosis of definite PD. However, recent findings suggest
by the robust reduction in neuronal NF-κB, NO, COX-2, and TNF-α that circulatory blood platelets, due to their significant similarities with
expression in the substantia nigra of PD mice (Anitua et al., 2015). DA neurons, could potentially provide a valuable source of efficient
Furthermore, Gouel et al. also demonstrated that human platelet lysates biomarkers to assist in early PD detection. Furthermore, these tiny
are a rich source of various growth factors, which can potentially pro- platelets could be promising peripheral surrogates to detect several
mote neuronal growth and proliferation. In the study, huma

Chunk 50:
ns, could potentially provide a valuable source of efficient
Furthermore, Gouel et al. also demonstrated that human platelet lysates biomarkers to assist in early PD detection. Furthermore, these tiny
are a rich source of various growth factors, which can potentially pro- platelets could be promising peripheral surrogates to detect several
mote neuronal growth and proliferation. In the study, human platelet fundamental molecular changes related to PD, which could provide
+
lysate prevented MPP -induced LUHMES (an in vitro PD model) crucial information for the development of theranostic tools. As
neuronal death by activating specific pathways, i.e., the Akt pathway thrombosis is an associated major risk factor for PD, we have proposed
and, to a lesser extent, the MEK pathway (Gouel et al., 2017). Similarly, several essential antiplatelet drugs with established findings to be used
Chou et al. have also reported that human platelet lysate is neuro- as the adjuvants along with the frontline drugs for the better manage-
protective in nature, where these lysates containing platelet-rich growth ment of PD. Moreover, the platelet-rich growth factors could be the
factors can rescue neuroinflammation in PD mice by inhibiting COX-2 in pragmatic biotherapeutic approach to improve the PD severity by not
+
MPP -induced LUHMES cell lines (Chou et al., 2017). Another study by only promoting neurogenesis but also attenuating neurotoxicity
Nebie et al. reported that heat-treated human platelet lysates enhanced (Table 2). Further research will elucidate the role of platelet as a pe-
the expression of neuronal TH, which is typically downregulated in PD ripheral model for PD and unveil more about the diagnostic as well as
+
patients, and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) in MPP -induced LUHMES the therapeutic effects of platelet and their growth factors in PD.
cells, and further rescued them from neuronal death (Table 2) (Nebie
et al., 2019). These findings suggest that platelet and its sec

Chunk 51:
ssion of neuronal TH, which is typically downregulated in PD ripheral model for PD and unveil more about the diagnostic as well as
+
patients, and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) in MPP -induced LUHMES the therapeutic effects of platelet and their growth factors in PD.
cells, and further rescued them from neuronal death (Table 2) (Nebie
et al., 2019). These findings suggest that platelet and its secretory CRediT authorship contribution statement
growth factors can modulate neurogenesis and can potentially help in
restoring DA neurons of SNpc regions in PD. S.K.B. and S.K.S designed the manuscript. S.K.B. wrote the manu-
script. A.R.P. and P.Y. prepared the illustrated figures and descriptive
6. Challenges and future perspectives tables. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Although there has been a substantial advancement in deducing the Funding
structural, functional as well as secretory alterations of platelet in PD,
there are several vital subcellular mechanisms remain to be discovered This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
in the near future. Since there are limited studies available regarding the agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
discovery of crucial PD-specific biomarkers, still these findings are
consolatory for future research in this area. The established preventive Competing interests
role of several antiplatelet drugs is admirable, but the lack of clinical
breakthroughs in the treatment procedure for PD remains to be disput- The authors declare no potential competing interests.
able, as a majority of the data regarding the efficacy of antiplatelet drugs
in PD come from laboratory studies. The antiplatelet drugs could
13

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Acknowledgment Deng, H., Wang, P., Jankovic, J., 2018. The genetics of Parkinson disease. Ageing Res.
Rev. 42, 72–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2017.12.007.
Drozdov, A.Z., Anokhin

Chunk 52:
f the data regarding the efficacy of antiplatelet drugs
in PD come from laboratory studies. The antiplatelet drugs could
13

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Acknowledgment Deng, H., Wang, P., Jankovic, J., 2018. The genetics of Parkinson disease. Ageing Res.
Rev. 42, 72–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2017.12.007.
Drozdov, A.Z., Anokhina, I.P., 1990. [Activity of tyrosine hydroxylase and monoamine
S.K.S. is highly thankful to the Department of Science and Technol- oxidase in human platelets during alcoholism]. Vopr. Med. Khim. 36, 54–57.
ogy (DST) [DST/NM/ NB/2018/40 (G)] for providing research support. Emamzadeh, F.N., Surguchov, A., 2018. Parkinson’s disease: biomarkers, treatment, and
S.K.B. and P.Y. are recipients of research fellowships from Council of risk factors. Front. Neurosci. 12, 612. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2018.00612.
Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) and University Grants Commis- Espinosa-Parrilla, Y., Gonzalez-Billault, C., Fuentes, E., Palomo, I., Alarco´n, M., 2019.
Decoding the role of platelets and related MicroRNAs in aging and
sion (UGC), New Delhi, respectively. neurodegenerative disorders. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11, 151. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnagi.2019.00151.
Estevez, B., Du, X., 2017. New concepts and mechanisms of platelet activation signaling.
References Physiology 32, 162–177. https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00020.2016.
Factor, S.A., Ortof, E., Dentinger, M.P., Mankes, R., Barron, K.D., 1994. Platelet
Adams, B., Nunes, J.M., Page, M.J., Roberts, T., Carr, J., Nell, T.A., Kell, D.B., morphology in Parkinson’s disease: an electron microscopic study. J. Neurol. Sci.
Pretorius, E., 2019. Parkinson’s disease: a systemic inflammatory disease 122, 84–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-510x(94)90056-6.
accompanied by bacterial inflammagens. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11, 210. https:// Ferrarese, C., Zoia, C., Pecora, N., Piolti, R., Frigo, M., Bianchi, G., Sala, G., Begni, B.

Chunk 53:
, Kell, D.B., morphology in Parkinson’s disease: an electron microscopic study. J. Neurol. Sci.
Pretorius, E., 2019. Parkinson’s disease: a systemic inflammatory disease 122, 84–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-510x(94)90056-6.
accompanied by bacterial inflammagens. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11, 210. https:// Ferrarese, C., Zoia, C., Pecora, N., Piolti, R., Frigo, M., Bianchi, G., Sala, G., Begni, B.,
doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2019.00210. Riva, R., Frattola, L., 1999. Reduced platelet glutamate uptake in Parkinson’s
Anitua, E., Pascual, C., Antequera, D., Bolos, M., Padilla, S., Orive, G., Carro, E., 2014. disease. J. Neural Transm. 106, 685–692. https://doi.org/10.1007/s007020050189.
Plasma rich in growth factors (PRGF-Endoret) reduces neuropathologic hallmarks Ferrer-Ravento´s, P., Beyer, K., 2021. Alternative platelet activation pathways and their
and improves cognitive functions in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Neurobiol. role in neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiol. Dis. 159, 105512 https://doi.org/
Aging 35, 1582–1595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.009. 10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105512.
Anitua, E., Pascual, C., P´erez-Gonzalez, R., Antequera, D., Padilla, S., Orive, G., Carro, E., Firoz, C.K., Jabir, N.R., Khan, M.S., Mahmoud, M., Shakil, S., Damanhouri, G.A., Zaidi, S.
2013. Intranasal delivery of plasma and platelet growth factors using PRGF-Endoret K., Tabrez, S., Kamal, M.A., 2015. An overview on the correlation of neurological
system enhances neurogenesis in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 8, disorders with cardiovascular disease. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 22, 19–23. https://doi.org/
e73118. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073118. 10.1016/j.sjbs.2014.09.003.
Anitua, E., Pascual, C., P´erez-Gonzalez, R., Orive, G., Carro, E., 2015. Intranasal PRGF- Flora, G.D., Nayak, M.K., 2019. A brief review of cardiovascular diseases, associated risk
Endoret enhances neuronal survival and attenuates NF-κB-dependent inflammation factors and cu

Chunk 54:
 J. Biol. Sci. 22, 19–23. https://doi.org/
e73118. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073118. 10.1016/j.sjbs.2014.09.003.
Anitua, E., Pascual, C., P´erez-Gonzalez, R., Orive, G., Carro, E., 2015. Intranasal PRGF- Flora, G.D., Nayak, M.K., 2019. A brief review of cardiovascular diseases, associated risk
Endoret enhances neuronal survival and attenuates NF-κB-dependent inflammation factors and current treatment regimes. Curr. Pharm. Des. 25, 4063–4084. https://
process in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Control. Release 203, 170–180. doi.org/10.2174/1381612825666190925163827.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.02.030. Frankhauser, P., Grimmer, Y., Bugert, P., Deuschle, M., Schmidt, M., Schloss, P., 2006.
Armstrong, M.J., Okun, M.S., 2020. Diagnosis and treatment of Parkinson disease: a Characterization of the neuronal dopamine transporter DAT in human blood
review. JAMA 323, 548–560. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.22360. platelets. Neurosci. Lett. 399, 197–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Ascherio, A., Schwarzschild, M.A., 2016. The epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease: risk neulet.2006.01.062.
factors and prevention. Lancet Neurol. 15, 1257–1272. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Fyfe, I., 2020. Aspirin and ibuprofen could lower risk of LRRK2 Parkinson disease. Nat.
S1474-4422(16)30230-7. Rev. Neurol. 16, 460. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-020-0394-7.
Babur, O ¨ ., Melrose, A.R., Cunliffe, J.M., Klimek, J., Pang, J., Sepp, A.-L.I., Zilberman- Ga´mez-Valero, A., Campdelacreu, J., Vilas, D., Ispierto, L., Gasco´n-Bayarri, J., Ren˜´e, R.,
Rudenko, J., Tassi Yunga, S., Zheng, T., Parra-Izquierdo, I., Minnier, J., McCarty, O. A ´ lvarez, R., Armengol, M.P., Borr`as, F.E., Beyer, K., 2021. Platelet miRNA
J.T., Demir, E., Reddy, A.P., Wilmarth, P.A., David, L.L., Aslan, J.E., 2020. biosignature discriminates between dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s
Phosphoproteomic quantitation and causal analysis reveal pathways in GPVI/ITAM- disease. Biomedicines 9. http

Chunk 55:
Zheng, T., Parra-Izquierdo, I., Minnier, J., McCarty, O. A ´ lvarez, R., Armengol, M.P., Borr`as, F.E., Beyer, K., 2021. Platelet miRNA
J.T., Demir, E., Reddy, A.P., Wilmarth, P.A., David, L.L., Aslan, J.E., 2020. biosignature discriminates between dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s
Phosphoproteomic quantitation and causal analysis reveal pathways in GPVI/ITAM- disease. Biomedicines 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9091272.
mediated platelet activation programs. Blood 136, 2346–2358. https://doi.org/ Gautam, D., Tiwari, A., Nath Chaurasia, R., Dash, D., 2019. Glutamate induces synthesis
10.1182/blood.2020005496. of thrombogenic peptides and extracellular vesicle release from human platelets. Sci.
Ball, N., Teo, W.-P., Chandra, S., Chapman, J., 2019. Parkinson’s disease and the Rep. 9, 8346 (https://doi.org/bon).
environment. Front. Neurol. 10, 218. https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2019.00218. Geyik, S., Yigiter, R., Akgul, G.P., Elci, M., Firat, Y.E., 2016. The relationship between
Behari, M., Shrivastava, M., 2013. Role of platelets in neurodegenerative diseases: a Parkinson‘s disease and mean platelet volume. Park. Hast. Hareket Bozuklukları
universal pathophysiology. Int. J. Neurosci. 123, 287–299. https://doi.org/10.3109/ Derg. 19, 31–34.
00207454.2012.751534. Ghoshal, K., Bhattacharyya, M., 2014. Overview of platelet physiology: its hemostatic
Beura, S.K., Panigrahi, A.R., Yadav, P., Agrawal, S., Singh, S.K., 2022. Role of neurons and nonhemostatic role in disease pathogenesis. Sci. World J. 2014, 781857 https://
and glia cells in wound healing as a novel perspective considering platelet as a doi.org/10.1155/2014/781857.
conventional player. Mol. Neurobiol. 59, 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/ Goelz, N., Eekels, J.J.M., Pantic, M., Kamber, C.T., Speer, O., Franzoso, F.D.,
s12035-021-02587-4. Schmugge, M., 2021. Platelets express adaptor proteins of the extrinsic apoptosis
Beura, S.K., Panigrahi, A.R., Yadav, P., Singh, S.K., 2021. Phytochemicals as p

Chunk 56:
spective considering platelet as a doi.org/10.1155/2014/781857.
conventional player. Mol. Neurobiol. 59, 137–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/ Goelz, N., Eekels, J.J.M., Pantic, M., Kamber, C.T., Speer, O., Franzoso, F.D.,
s12035-021-02587-4. Schmugge, M., 2021. Platelets express adaptor proteins of the extrinsic apoptosis
Beura, S.K., Panigrahi, A.R., Yadav, P., Singh, S.K., 2021. Phytochemicals as potential pathway and can activate caspase-8. PLoS One 16, e0244848. https://doi.org/
therapeutics for SARS-CoV-2-induced cardiovascular complications: thrombosis and 10.1371/journal.pone.0244848.
platelet perspective. Front. Pharm. 12, 658273 https://doi.org/10.3389/ Gomaa, A.A., El-Abhar, H.S., Abdallah, D.M., Awad, A.S., Soubh, A.A., 2021. Prasugrel
fphar.2021.658273. anti-ischemic effect in rats: modulation of hippocampal SUMO2/3-IкBα/Ubc9 and
Bloem, B.R., Okun, M.S., Klein, C., 2021. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 397, 2284–2303. SIRT-1/miR-22 trajectories. Toxicol. Appl. Pharm. 426, 115635 https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00218-X. 10.1016/j.taap.2021.115635.
Blonder, L.X., 2018. Historical and cross-cultural perspectives on Parkinson’s disease. Gouel, F., Do Van, B., Chou, M.-L., Jonneaux, A., Moreau, C., Bordet, R., Burnouf, T.,
J. Complement. Integr. Med. 15. https://doi.org/10.1515/jcim-2016-0065. Devedjian, J.-C., Devos, D., 2017. The protective effect of human platelet lysate in
Bonuccelli, U., Nuti, A., Del Dotto, P., Piccini, P., Martini, C., Giannaccini, G., models of neurodegenerative disease: involvement of the Akt and MEK pathways.
Lucacchini, A., Muratorio, A., 1991. Platelet peripheral benzodiazepine receptors are J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. https://doi.org/10.1002/term.2222.
decreased in Parkinson’s disease. Life Sci. 48, 1185–1190. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Gowert, N.S., Donner, L., Chatterjee, M., Eisele, Y.S., Towhid, S.T., Münzer, P.,
0024-3205(91)90457-m. Walker, B., Ogorek, I., Borst, O., Grandoch, M., Schaller, M., Fischer, J.W.,
B

Chunk 57:
 Muratorio, A., 1991. Platelet peripheral benzodiazepine receptors are J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. https://doi.org/10.1002/term.2222.
decreased in Parkinson’s disease. Life Sci. 48, 1185–1190. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Gowert, N.S., Donner, L., Chatterjee, M., Eisele, Y.S., Towhid, S.T., Münzer, P.,
0024-3205(91)90457-m. Walker, B., Ogorek, I., Borst, O., Grandoch, M., Schaller, M., Fischer, J.W.,
Bonuccelli, U., Piccini, P., Del Dotto, P., Pacifici, G.M., Corsini, G.U., Muratorio, A., Gawaz, M., Weggen, S., Lang, F., Jucker, M., Elvers, M., 2014. Blood platelets in the
1990. Platelet monoamine oxidase B activity in parkinsonian patients. J. Neurol. progression of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 9, e90523. https://doi.org/10.1371/
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 53, 854–855. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.53.10.854. journal.pone.0090523.
Borhani-Haghighi, M., Mohamadi, Y., 2019. The therapeutic effect of platelet-rich Haas, R.H., Nasirian, F., Nakano, K., Ward, D., Pay, M., Hill, R., Shults, C.W., 1995. Low
plasma on the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mice. J. Neuroimmunol. platelet mitochondrial complex I and complex II/III activity in early untreated
333, 476958 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2019.04.018. Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 37, 714–722. https://doi.org/10.1002/
Chen, Y., Jiang, M., Li, L., Ye, M., Yu, M., Zhang, L., Ge, B., Xu, W., Wei, D., 2018. ana.410370604.
DL‑3–n‑butylphthalide reduces microglial activation in lipopolysaccharide‑induced Hashimoto, M., Yoshimoto, M., Sisk, A., Hsu, L.J., Sundsmo, M., Kittel, A., Saitoh, T.,
Parkinson’s disease model mice. Mol. Med. Rep. 17, 3884–3890. https://doi.org/ Miller, A., Masliah, E., 1997. NACP, a synaptic protein involved in Alzheimer’s
10.3892/mmr.2017.8332. disease, is differentially regulated during megakaryocyte differentiation. Biochem.
Chou, M.-L., Wu, J.-W., Gouel, F., Jonneaux, A., Timmerman, K., Renn, T.-Y., Laloux, C., Biophys. Res. Commun. 237, 611–616. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1997.6978.

Chunk 58:
. Mol. Med. Rep. 17, 3884–3890. https://doi.org/ Miller, A., Masliah, E., 1997. NACP, a synaptic protein involved in Alzheimer’s
10.3892/mmr.2017.8332. disease, is differentially regulated during megakaryocyte differentiation. Biochem.
Chou, M.-L., Wu, J.-W., Gouel, F., Jonneaux, A., Timmerman, K., Renn, T.-Y., Laloux, C., Biophys. Res. Commun. 237, 611–616. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1997.6978.
Chang, H.-M., Lin, L.-T., Devedjian, J.-C., Devos, D., Burnouf, T., 2017. Tailor-made Hedya, S.A., Safar, M.M., Bahgat, A.K., 2018. Cilostazol mediated nurr1 and autophagy
purified human platelet lysate concentrated in neurotrophins for treatment of enhancement: neuroprotective activity in rat rotenone PD model. Mol. Neurobiol.
Parkinson’s disease. Biomaterials 142, 77–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 55, 7579–7587. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-018-0923-1.
biomaterials.2017.07.018. Heijnen, H., Van der Sluijs, P., 2015. Platelet secretory behaviour: as diverse as the
Clark, E.H., V´azquez de la Torre, A., Hoshikawa, T., Briston, T., 2021. Targeting granules… or not? J. Thromb. Haemost. 13, 2141–2151.
mitophagy in Parkinson’s disease. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100209 https://doi.org/ Ho¨llerhage, M., Moebius, C., Melms, J., Chiu, W.-H., Goebel, J.N., Chakroun, T.,
10.1074/jbc.REV120.014294. Koeglsperger, T., Oertel, W.H., Ro¨sler, T.W., Bickle, M., Ho¨glinger, G.U., 2017.
Danielczyk, W., Streifler, M., Konradi, C., Riederer, P., Moll, G., 1988. Platelet MAO-B Protective efficacy of phosphodiesterase-1 inhibition against alpha-synuclein
activity and the psychopathology of Parkinson’s disease, senile dementia and multi- toxicity revealed by compound screening in LUHMES cells. Sci. Rep. 7, 11469.
infarct dementia. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 78, 730–736. https://doi.org/10.1111/ https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-11664-5.
j.1600-0447.1988.tb06412.x. Hu, H., Straub, A., Tian, Z., Bassler, N., Cheng, J., Peter, K., 2009. Celastrol, a triterpene
De La Fourniere, F., Placines, B., Dehorne, M

Chunk 59:
ase, senile dementia and multi- toxicity revealed by compound screening in LUHMES cells. Sci. Rep. 7, 11469.
infarct dementia. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 78, 730–736. https://doi.org/10.1111/ https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-11664-5.
j.1600-0447.1988.tb06412.x. Hu, H., Straub, A., Tian, Z., Bassler, N., Cheng, J., Peter, K., 2009. Celastrol, a triterpene
De La Fourniere, F., Placines, B., Dehorne, M., Albert, D., Lagabrielle, J.F., Grandet, P., extracted from Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F, inhibits platelet activation.
Dartigues, J.F., 2000. Decreasing activity of the platelet glutathione peroxidase in J. Cardiovasc. Pharm. 54, 240–245. https://doi.org/10.1097/
aged patients with Parkinson’s disease. Rev. Geriatr. 25, 457–462. FJC.0b013e3181b21472.
14

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
Huang, J.-Z., Chen, Y.-Z., Su, M., Zheng, H.-F., Yang, Y.-P., Chen, J., Liu, C.-F., 2010. dl- activation steps by reducing ROS levels. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 6192. https://doi.org/
3-n-Butylphthalide prevents oxidative damage and reduces mitochondrial 10.3390/IJMS21176192.
dysfunction in an MPP(+)-induced cellular model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci. Michelson, A.D., 2010. Antiplatelet therapies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.
Lett. 475, 89–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2010.03.053. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 9, 154–169. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd2957.
Inyushin, M., Zayas-Santiago, A., Rojas, L., Kucheryavykh, L., 2020. On the role of Morrell, C.N., Aggrey, A.A., Chapman, L.M., Modjeski, K.L., 2014. Emerging roles for
platelet-generated amyloid beta peptides in certain amyloidosis health platelets as immune and inflammatory cells. Blood 123, 2759–2767. https://doi.org/
complications. Front. Immunol. 0, 2587. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 10.1182/blood-2013-11-462432.
FIMMU.2020.571083. Nebie, O., Devos, D., Vingtdeux, V., Barro, L., Devedjian, J.-C., Jonneaux, A., Chou, M.-
Israels, S.J., McMillan, E.M., Robertson, 

Chunk 60:
platelet-generated amyloid beta peptides in certain amyloidosis health platelets as immune and inflammatory cells. Blood 123, 2759–2767. https://doi.org/
complications. Front. Immunol. 0, 2587. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 10.1182/blood-2013-11-462432.
FIMMU.2020.571083. Nebie, O., Devos, D., Vingtdeux, V., Barro, L., Devedjian, J.-C., Jonneaux, A., Chou, M.-
Israels, S.J., McMillan, E.M., Robertson, C., Singhory, S., McNicol, A., 1996. The L., Bordet, R., Bu´ee, L., Knutson, F., Blum, D., Burnouf, T., 2019. The neuroprotective
lysosomal granule membrane protein, LAMP-2, is also present in platelet dense activity of heat-treated human platelet lysate biomaterials manufactured from
granule membranes. Thromb. Haemost. 75, 623–629. outdated pathogen-reduced (amotosalen/UVA) platelet concentrates. J. Biomed. Sci.
Jackson, S.P., 2007. The growing complexity of platelet aggregation. Blood 109, 26, 89. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-019-0579-9.
5087–5095. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2006-12-027698. Ohno, K., Tomizawa, A., Mizuno, M., Jakubowski, J.A., Sugidachi, A., 2016. Prasugrel, a
Jayakumar, T., Lin, K.C., Lu, W.J., Lin, C.Y., Pitchairaj, G., Li, J.Y., Sheu, J.R., 2017. platelet P2Y12 receptor antagonist, improves abnormal gait in a novel murine model
Nobiletin, a citrus flavonoid, activates vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein in of thrombotic hindlimb ischemia. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 5, e002889 https://doi.org/
human platelets through non-cyclic nucleotide-related mechanisms. Int. J. Mol. Med. 10.1161/JAHA.115.002889.
39, 174–182. https://doi.org/10.3892/IJMM.2016.2822/HTML. Olanow, C.W., McNaught, K.S.P., 2006. Ubiquitin-proteasome system and Parkinson’s
Jedlitschky, G., Greinacher, A., Kroemer, H.K., 2012. Transporters in human platelets: disease. Mov. Disord. 21, 1806–1823. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21013.
physiologic function and impact for pharmacotherapy. Blood 119, 3394–3402. Osinga, T.E., van der Horst-Schrivers, A.N.A., van Faassen, M., Kerstens, M.N.,
https:/

Chunk 61:
now, C.W., McNaught, K.S.P., 2006. Ubiquitin-proteasome system and Parkinson’s
Jedlitschky, G., Greinacher, A., Kroemer, H.K., 2012. Transporters in human platelets: disease. Mov. Disord. 21, 1806–1823. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21013.
physiologic function and impact for pharmacotherapy. Blood 119, 3394–3402. Osinga, T.E., van der Horst-Schrivers, A.N.A., van Faassen, M., Kerstens, M.N.,
https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-09-336933. Dullaart, R.P.F., Peters, M.A.M., van der Laan, B.F.A.M., de Bock, G.H., Links, T.P.,
Jeong, K.H., Jeon, M.-T., Kim, H.D., Jung, U.J., Jang, M.C., Chu, J.W., Yang, S.J., Choi, I. Kema, I.P., 2016. Dopamine concentration in blood platelets is elevated in patients
Y., Choi, M.-S., Kim, S.R., 2015. Nobiletin protects dopaminergic neurons in the 1- with head and neck paragangliomas. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 54, 1395–1401. https://
methyl-4-phenylpyridinium-treated rat model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Med. Food doi.org/10.1515/cclm-2015-0631.
18, 409–414. https://doi.org/10.1089/jmf.2014.3241. Pang, S.Y.-Y., Ho, P.W.-L., Liu, H.-F., Leung, C.-T., Li, L., Chang, E.E.S., Ramsden, D.B.,
Kalia, L.V., Lang, A.E., 2015. Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 386, 896–912. https://doi.org/ Ho, S.-L., 2019. The interplay of aging, genetics and environmental factors in the
10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61393-3. pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Transl. Neurodegener. 8, 23. https://doi.org/
Kim, D.-C., Um, H.S., Oh, E.-T., Cho, J.-Y., Jang, Y., 2020. The effect of endurance 10.1186/s40035-019-0165-9.
exercise and MitoQ intake on pathological characteristics in MPTP-induced animal Park, J.-H., Kim, D.-H., Park, Y.-G., Kwon, D.-Y., Choi, M., Jung, J.-H., Han, K., 2020.
model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Korean Appl. Sci. Technol. 37, 744–754. Association of Parkinson disease with risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause
Kim, H.-H., Liao, J.K., 2008. Translational therapeutics of dipyridamole. Arterioscler. mortality: a nationwide, population-based cohort study. Circula

Chunk 62:
mal Park, J.-H., Kim, D.-H., Park, Y.-G., Kwon, D.-Y., Choi, M., Jung, J.-H., Han, K., 2020.
model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Korean Appl. Sci. Technol. 37, 744–754. Association of Parkinson disease with risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause
Kim, H.-H., Liao, J.K., 2008. Translational therapeutics of dipyridamole. Arterioscler. mortality: a nationwide, population-based cohort study. Circulation. https://doi.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 28, s39–s42. https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.160226. org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.044948.
Klein, C., Westenberger, A., 2012. Genetics of Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Park, S.M., Jung, H.Y., Kim, H.O., Rhim, H., Paik, S.R., Chung, K.C., Park, J.H., Kim, J.,
Perspect. Med. 2, a008888 https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a008888. 2002. Evidence that alpha-synuclein functions as a negative regulator of Ca(++)-
Koçer, A., Yaman, A., Niftaliyev, E., Dürüyen, H., Eryılmaz, M., Koçer, E., 2013. dependent alpha-granule release from human platelets. Blood 100, 2506–2514.
Assessment of platelet indices in patients with neurodegenerative diseases: mean https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V100.7.2506.
platelet volume was increased in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Curr. Gerontol. Pei, Y., Maitta, R.W., 2019. Alpha synuclein in hematopoiesis and immunity. Heliyon 5,
Geriatr. Res. 2013, 986254 https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/986254. e02590. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02590.
Koupenova, M., Kehrel, B.E., Corkrey, H.A., Freedman, J.E., 2017. Thrombosis and Pickrell, A.M., Youle, R.J., 2015. The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity
platelets: an update. Eur. Heart J. 38, 785–791. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ in Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 85, 257–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ehw550. neuron.2014.12.007.
Lee, S.H., Du, J., Hwa, J., Kim, W.-H., 2020. Parkin coordinates platelet stress response in Pienimaeki-Roemer, A., Kuhlmann, K., Bo¨ttcher, A., Konovalova, T., Black, A., Orso´, E.,
diabetes mellitus: a big ro

Chunk 63:
delity
platelets: an update. Eur. Heart J. 38, 785–791. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ in Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 85, 257–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ehw550. neuron.2014.12.007.
Lee, S.H., Du, J., Hwa, J., Kim, W.-H., 2020. Parkin coordinates platelet stress response in Pienimaeki-Roemer, A., Kuhlmann, K., Bo¨ttcher, A., Konovalova, T., Black, A., Orso´, E.,
diabetes mellitus: a big role in a small cell. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21. https://doi.org/ Liebisch, G., Ahrens, M., Eisenacher, M., Meyer, H.E., Schmitz, G., 2015. Lipidomic
10.3390/ijms21165869. and proteomic characterization of platelet extracellular vesicle subfractions from
Lehtonen, S ˇ ., Sonninen, T.-M., Wojciechowski, S., Goldsteins, G., Koistinaho, J., 2019. senescent platelets. Transfusion 55, 507–521. https://doi.org/10.1111/trf.12874.
Dysfunction of cellular proteostasis in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 13, 457. Pietraforte, D., Vona, R., Marchesi, A., de Jacobis, I.T., Villani, A., Del Principe, D.,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.00457. Straface, E., 2014. Redox control of platelet functions in physiology and
Leiter, O., Walker, T.L., 2020. Platelets in neurodegenerative conditions-friend or foe? pathophysiology. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 21, 177–193. https://doi.org/10.1089/
Front. Immunol. 11, 747. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.00747. ars.2013.5532.
Li, X., Jia, Z., Yan, Y., 2022. Ticagrelor for prevention of stroke and cognitive impairment Poewe, W., Seppi, K., Tanner, C.M., Halliday, G.M., Brundin, P., Volkmann, J.,
in patients with vascular high-risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled Schrag, A.-E., Lang, A.E., 2017. Parkinson disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 3, 17013.
trials. Int. J. Cardiol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.01.060. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.13.
Li, Z., Delaney, M.K., O’Brien, K.A., Du, X., 2010. Signaling during platelet adhesion and Ponomarev, E.D., 2018. Fresh evidence for platelets as neuronal and innate immune
activation. Ar

Chunk 64:
andomized controlled Schrag, A.-E., Lang, A.E., 2017. Parkinson disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 3, 17013.
trials. Int. J. Cardiol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2022.01.060. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.13.
Li, Z., Delaney, M.K., O’Brien, K.A., Du, X., 2010. Signaling during platelet adhesion and Ponomarev, E.D., 2018. Fresh evidence for platelets as neuronal and innate immune
activation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 30, 2341–2349. https://doi.org/ cells: their role in the activation, differentiation, and deactivation of Th1, Th17, and
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.207522. Tregs during tissue inflammation. Front. Immunol. 9, 406. https://doi.org/10.3389/
Lim, K.-M., Kim, H.-H., Bae, O.-N., Noh, J.-Y., Kim, K.-Y., Kim, S.-H., Chung, S.-M., fimmu.2018.00406.
Shin, S., Kim, H.-Y., Chung, J.-H., 2009. Inhibition of platelet aggregation by 1- Pontarollo, G., Acquasaliente, L., Radu, C.M., Peterle, D., Artusi, I., Pagotto, A., Uliana,
methyl-4-phenyl pyridinium ion (MPP+) through ATP depletion: evidence for the F., Simioni, P., Negro, A., De Filippis, V., 2021. Human α-synuclein inhibits platelets
reduced platelet activities in Parkinson’s disease. Platelets 20, 163–170. https://doi. aggregation in vitro by interfering with the α-thrombin/protease-activated receptor
org/10.1080/09537100902721746. 1 functional axis. bioRxiv.
Lin, M.-W., Lin, C.C., Chen, Y.-H., Yang, H.-B., Hung, S.-Y., 2019. Celastrol inhibits Potashkin, J., Huang, X., Becker, C., Chen, H., Foltynie, T., Marras, C., 2020.
dopaminergic neuronal death of Parkinson’s disease through activating mitophagy. Understanding the links between cardiovascular disease and Parkinson’s disease.
Antioxidants 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox9010037. Mov. Disord. 35, 55–74. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27836.
Machaczka, M., Rucinska, M., Skotnicki, A.B., Jurczak, W., 1999. Parkinson’s syndrome Pozo Devoto, V.M., Falzone, T.L., 2017. Mitochondrial dynamics in Parkinson’s disease:
preceding clinical manifestation of Gaucher’

Chunk 65:
ng the links between cardiovascular disease and Parkinson’s disease.
Antioxidants 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox9010037. Mov. Disord. 35, 55–74. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.27836.
Machaczka, M., Rucinska, M., Skotnicki, A.B., Jurczak, W., 1999. Parkinson’s syndrome Pozo Devoto, V.M., Falzone, T.L., 2017. Mitochondrial dynamics in Parkinson’s disease:
preceding clinical manifestation of Gaucher’s disease. Am. J. Hematol. https://doi. a role for α-synuclein? Dis. Model. Mech. 10, 1075–1087. https://doi.org/10.1242/
org/10.1002/(sici)1096-8652(199907)61:3<216::aid-ajh12>3.0.co;2-b. dmm.026294.
Madiha, S., Batool, Z., Tabassum, S., Liaquat, L., Sadir, S., Shahzad, S., Naqvi, F., Rabey, J.M., Shabtai, H., Graff, E., Oberman, Z., 1993. [3H] dopamine uptake by platelet
Saleem, S., Yousuf, S., Nawaz, A., Ahmad, S., Sajid, I., Afzal, A., Haider, S., 2021. storage granules in Parkinson’s disease. Life Sci. 53, 1753–1759.
Quercetin exhibits potent antioxidant activity, restores motor and non-motor deficits Reheman, A., Tasneem, S., Ni, H., Hayward, C.P.M., 2010. Mice with deleted multimerin
induced by rotenone toxicity. PLoS One 16, e0258928. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 1 and alpha-synuclein genes have impaired platelet adhesion and impaired thrombus
journal.pone.0258928. formation that is corrected by multimerin 1. Thromb. Res. 125, e177–e183. https://
Majithia, A., Bhatt, D.L., 2019. Novel antiplatelet therapies for atherothrombotic doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2010.01.009.
diseases. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 39, 546–557. https://doi.org/10.1161/ Rijkers, M., van den Eshof, B.L., van der Meer, P.F., van Alphen, F.P.J., de Korte, D.,
ATVBAHA.118.310955. Leebeek, F.W.G., Meijer, A.B., Voorberg, J., Jansen, A.J.G., 2017. Monitoring storage
Malpartida, A.B., Williamson, M., Narendra, D.P., Wade-Martins, R., Ryan, B.J., 2021. induced changes in the platelet proteome employing label free quantitative mass
Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy in Parkinson’s disease: from m

Chunk 66:
L., van der Meer, P.F., van Alphen, F.P.J., de Korte, D.,
ATVBAHA.118.310955. Leebeek, F.W.G., Meijer, A.B., Voorberg, J., Jansen, A.J.G., 2017. Monitoring storage
Malpartida, A.B., Williamson, M., Narendra, D.P., Wade-Martins, R., Ryan, B.J., 2021. induced changes in the platelet proteome employing label free quantitative mass
Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy in Parkinson’s disease: from mechanism spectrometry. Sci. Rep. 7, 11045. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-11643-w.
to therapy. Trends Biochem. Sci. 46, 329–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Rocha, E.M., De Miranda, B., Sanders, L.H., 2018. Alpha-synuclein: pathology,
tibs.2020.11.007. mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease.
Marinus, J., Zhu, K., Marras, C., Aarsland, D., van Hilten, J.J., 2018. Risk factors for non- Neurobiol. Dis. 109, 249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2017.04.004.
motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 17, 559–568. https://doi. Rodríguez-Pallares, J., Caruncho, H.J., Guerra, M.J., Labandeira-García, J.L., 2002.
org/10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30127-3. Dipyridamole-induced increase in production of rat dopaminergic neurons from
Masselli, E., Pozzi, G., Vaccarezza, M., Mirandola, P., Galli, D., Vitale, M., Carubbi, C., mesencephalic precursors. Neurosci. Lett. 320, 65–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/
Gobbi, G., 2020. ROS in platelet biology: functional aspects and methodological s0304-3940(02)00043-5.
insights. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21144866. Ruggeri, Z.M., Mendolicchio, G.L., 2007. Adhesion mechanisms in platelet function. Circ.
M´endez, D., Arauna, D., Fuentes, F., Araya-Maturana, R., Palomo, I., Alarco´n, M., Res. 100, 1673–1685. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000267878.97021.ab.
Sebasti´an, D., Zorzano, A., Fuentes, E., 2020. Mitoquinone (MitoQ) inhibits platelet Sala, G., Brighina, L., Saracchi, E., Fermi, S., Riva, C., Carrozza, V., Pirovano, M.,
Ferrarese, C., 2010. Vesicular monoamine transporter 2 mRNA level

Chunk 67:
irc.
M´endez, D., Arauna, D., Fuentes, F., Araya-Maturana, R., Palomo, I., Alarco´n, M., Res. 100, 1673–1685. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000267878.97021.ab.
Sebasti´an, D., Zorzano, A., Fuentes, E., 2020. Mitoquinone (MitoQ) inhibits platelet Sala, G., Brighina, L., Saracchi, E., Fermi, S., Riva, C., Carrozza, V., Pirovano, M.,
Ferrarese, C., 2010. Vesicular monoamine transporter 2 mRNA levels are reduced in
15

---PAGE BREAK---

S.K. Beura et al. A g e i n g R e s e a r c h R e v i e w s80(2022)101681
platelets from patients with Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural Transm. 117, 1093–1098. Thrash-Williams, B., Karuppagounder, S.S., Bhattacharya, D., Ahuja, M.,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-010-0446-z. Suppiramaniam, V., Dhanasekaran, M., 2016. Methamphetamine-induced
Sharma, P., Nag, D., Atam, V., Seth, P.K., Khanna, V.K., 1991. Platelet aggregation in dopaminergic toxicity prevented owing to the neuroprotective effects of salicylic
patients with Parkinson’s disease. Stroke. https://doi.org/10.1161/01. acid. Life Sci. 154, 24–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2016.02.072.
str.22.12.1607. Twomey, L., Wallace, R.G., Cummins, P.M., Degryse, B., Sheridan, S., Harrison, M.,
Shi, M., Zabetian, C.P., Hancock, A.M., Ginghina, C., Hong, Z., Yearout, D., Chung, K.A., Moyna, N., Meade-Murphy, G., Navasiolava, N., Custaud, M.-A., 2018. Platelets:
Quinn, J.F., Peskind, E.R., Galasko, D., Jankovic, J., Leverenz, J.B., Zhang, J., 2010. from formation to function. In: Homeostasis–An Integrated Vision. IntechOpen.
Significance and confounders of peripheral DJ-1 and alpha-synuclein in Parkinson’s Tysnes, O.-B., Storstein, A., 2017. Epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural
disease. Neurosci. Lett. 480, 78–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2010.06.009. Transm. 124, 901–905. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017-1686-y.
Silverstein, R.L., Febbraio, M., 1992. Identification of lysosome-associated membrane Ugrumov, M., 2020. Development of early diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: il

Chunk 68:
nson’s Tysnes, O.-B., Storstein, A., 2017. Epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural
disease. Neurosci. Lett. 480, 78–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2010.06.009. Transm. 124, 901–905. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017-1686-y.
Silverstein, R.L., Febbraio, M., 1992. Identification of lysosome-associated membrane Ugrumov, M., 2020. Development of early diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: illusion or
protein-2 as an activation-dependent platelet surface glycoprotein. Blood 80, reality. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 26, 997–1009. https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.13429.
1470–1475. van der Meijden, P.E.J., Heemskerk, J.W.M., 2019. Platelet biology and functions: new
Simonidze, V., Samushia, O., 2014. Comparative analysis of structural changes in concepts and clinical perspectives. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/
thrombocytes during Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Georgian Med. N. 41–46. s41569-018-0110-0.
Sivanandy, P., Leey, T.C., Xiang, T.C., Ling, T.C., Wey Han, S.A., Semilan, S.L.A., Va´zquez-V´elez, G.E., Zoghbi, H.Y., 2021. Parkinson’s disease genetics and
Hong, P.K., 2021. Systematic review on Parkinson’s disease medications, pathophysiology. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 44, 87–108. https://doi.org/10.1146/
emphasizing on three recently approved drugs to control Parkinson’s symptoms. Int. annurev-neuro-100720-034518.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19010364. Veitinger, M., Varga, B., Guterres, S.B., Zellner, M., 2014. Platelets, a reliable source for
Stahl, S.M., 1977. The human platelet. A diagnostic and research tool for the study of peripheral Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers? Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 21 (2),
biogenic amines in psychiatric and neurologic disorders. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 34, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/2051-5960-2-65.
509–516. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1977.01770170019001. Walsh, T.G., van den Bosch, M.T.J., Lewis, K.E., Williams, C.M., Poole, A.W., 2018. Loss
Stefaniuk, C.M., Schlegelmilch, J., Meyers

Chunk 69:
peripheral Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers? Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 21 (2),
biogenic amines in psychiatric and neurologic disorders. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 34, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/2051-5960-2-65.
509–516. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1977.01770170019001. Walsh, T.G., van den Bosch, M.T.J., Lewis, K.E., Williams, C.M., Poole, A.W., 2018. Loss
Stefaniuk, C.M., Schlegelmilch, J., Meyerson, H.J., Harding, C.V., Maitta, R.W., 2021. of the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 does not alter platelet function. Sci. Rep. 8,
Initial assessment of α-synuclein structure in platelets. J. Thromb. Thrombolysis 14377. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32716-4.
(https://doi.org/pei). Xi, Y., Feng, D., Tao, K., Wang, R., Shi, Y., Qin, H., Murphy, M.P., Yang, Q., Zhao, G.,
Stuendl, A., Kraus, T., Chatterjee, M., Zapke, B., Sadowski, B., Moebius, W., Hobert, M.A., 2018. MitoQ protects dopaminergic neurons in a 6-OHDA induced PD model by
Deuschle, C., Brockmann, K., Maetzler, W., Mollenhauer, B., Schneider, A., 2021. enhancing Mfn2-dependent mitochondrial fusion via activation of PGC-1α. Biochim.
α-Synuclein in plasma-derived extracellular vesicles is a potential biomarker of Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1864, 2859–2870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 36, 2508–2518. https://doi.org/10.1002/ bbadis.2018.05.018.
mds.28639. Yabuki, Y., Ohizumi, Y., Yokosuka, A., Mimaki, Y., Fukunaga, K., 2014. Nobiletin
Sun, B., Le, S.N., Lin, S., Fong, M., Guertin, M., Liu, Y., Tandon, N.N., Yoshitake, M., treatment improves motor and cognitive deficits seen in MPTP-induced Parkinson
Kambayashi, J.-I., 2002. New mechanism of action for cilostazol: interplay between model mice. Neuroscience 259, 126–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adenosine and cilostazol in inhibiting platelet activation. J. Cardiovasc. Pharm. 40, neuroscience.2013.11.051.
577–585. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005344-200210000-00011. Yadav, S., Storrie, B., 2017. The cellular basis of platelet secretion: 

Chunk 70:
rkinson
Kambayashi, J.-I., 2002. New mechanism of action for cilostazol: interplay between model mice. Neuroscience 259, 126–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
adenosine and cilostazol in inhibiting platelet activation. J. Cardiovasc. Pharm. 40, neuroscience.2013.11.051.
577–585. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005344-200210000-00011. Yadav, S., Storrie, B., 2017. The cellular basis of platelet secretion: emerging structure/
Sveinbjornsdottir, S., 2016. The clinical symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem. function relationships. Platelets 28, 108–118. https://doi.org/10.1080/
139 Suppl., 318–324. https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13691. 09537104.2016.1257786.
Tamtaji, O.R., Hadinezhad, T., Fallah, M., Shahmirzadi, A.R., Taghizadeh, M., Yamauchi, K., Imai, T., Shimazawa, M., Iwama, T., Hara, H., 2017. Effects of ticagrelor in
Behnam, M., Asemi, Z., 2020. The therapeutic potential of quercetin in Parkinson’s a mouse model of ischemic stroke. Sci. Rep. 7, 12088. https://doi.org/10.1038/
disease: insights into its molecular and cellular regulation. Curr. Drug Targets 21, s41598-017-12205-w.
509–518. Ye, J., Zhai, L., Zhang, Shenghui, Zhang, Y., Chen, L., Hu, L., Zhang, Si, Ding, Z., 2015.
Tana, C., Lauretani, F., Ticinesi, A., Prati, B., Nouvenne, A., Meschi, T., 2018. Molecular DL-3-n-butylphthalide inhibits platelet activation via inhibition of cPLA2-mediated
and clinical issues about the risk of venous thromboembolism in older patients: a TXA2 synthesis and phosphodiesterase. Platelets 26, 736–744. https://doi.org/
focus on Parkinson’s disease and parkinsonism. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19. https://doi.org/ 10.3109/09537104.2014.989826.
10.3390/ijms19051299. Zhang, L., Shao, Y., Tang, C., Liu, Z., Tang, D., Hu, C., Liang, X., Hu, Z., Luo, G., 2021.
Tashkandi, H., Shameli, A., Harding, C.V., Maitta, R.W., 2018. Ultrastructural changes in Identification of novel biomarkers in platelets for diagnosing Parkinson’s disease.
peripheral blood leukocytes in α-synuclein knockout mice. Blood 

Chunk 71:
 https://doi.org/ 10.3109/09537104.2014.989826.
10.3390/ijms19051299. Zhang, L., Shao, Y., Tang, C., Liu, Z., Tang, D., Hu, C., Liang, X., Hu, Z., Luo, G., 2021.
Tashkandi, H., Shameli, A., Harding, C.V., Maitta, R.W., 2018. Ultrastructural changes in Identification of novel biomarkers in platelets for diagnosing Parkinson’s disease.
peripheral blood leukocytes in α-synuclein knockout mice. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 73, Eur. Neurol. 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1159/000520102.
33–37 (https://doi.org/ste). Zhou, G., Miura, Y., Shoji, H., Yamada, S., Matsuishi, T., 2001. Platelet monoamine
Teixeira, J.H., Silva, A.M., Almeida, M.I., Barbosa, M.A., Santos, S.G., 2016. Circulating oxidase B and plasma beta-phenylethylamine in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol.
extracellular vesicles: their role in tissue repair and regeneration. Transfus. Apher. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 70, 229–231. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.70.2.229.
Sci. Off. J. World Apher. Assoc. Off. J. Eur. Soc. Haemapheresis 55, 53–61. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.transci.2016.07.015.
16

---PAGE BREAK---



