Chunk 1:
insight review articles
Protein folding and misfolding
Christopher M. Dobson
University of Cambridge, Department of Chemistry, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK (e-mail: cmd44@cam.ac.uk)
The manner in which a newly synthesized chain of amino acids transforms itself into a perfectly folded
protein depends both on the intrinsic properties of the amino-acid sequence and on multiple contributing
influences from the crowded cellular milieu. Folding and unfolding are crucial ways of regulating biological
activity and targeting proteins to different cellular locations. Aggregation of misfolded proteins that escape
the cellular quality-control mechanisms is a common feature of a wide range of highly debilitating and
increasingly prevalent diseases.
O
ne of the defining characteristics of a living sys- trial and error. Moreover, if the energy surface or ‘landscape’
tem is the ability of even the most intricate of its has the right shape (see Fig. 1) only a small number of all pos-
component molecular structures to self-assem- sible conformations needs to be sampled by any given pro-
ble with precision and fidelity. Uncovering the tein molecule during its transition from a random coil to a
mechanisms through which such processes take native structure3–6. Because the landscape is encoded by the
place is one of the grand challenges of modern science1. The amino-acid sequence, natural selection has enabled proteins
folding of proteins into their compact three-dimensional to evolve so that they are able to fold rapidly and efficiently.
structures is the most fundamental and universal example of Such a description, based more on the ideas of statistical
biological self-assembly; understanding this complex mechanics and polymer physics than on those of classic
process will therefore provide a unique insight into the way chemical dynamics, is often referred to as the ‘new view’ of
in which evolutionary selection has influenced the proper- protein folding7. As well as providing a

Chunk 2:
 example of Such a description, based more on the ideas of statistical
biological self-assembly; understanding this complex mechanics and polymer physics than on those of classic
process will therefore provide a unique insight into the way chemical dynamics, is often referred to as the ‘new view’ of
in which evolutionary selection has influenced the proper- protein folding7. As well as providing a firm conceptual basis
ties of a molecular system for functional advantage. The wide for folding, it has shown that many of the earlier phenome-
variety of highly specific structures that result from protein nological descriptions of the folding process are important
folding and that bring key functional groups into close prox- limiting cases of a general mechanism. These ideas are stim-
imity has enabled living systems to develop astonishing ulating the investigation of the most elementary steps in the
diversity and selectivity in their underlying chemical folding process by both experimental and theoretical proce-
processes. In addition to generating biological activity, how- dures. For example, biophysical measurements and comput-
ever, we now know that folding is coupled to many other bio- er simulations have revealed that many of the local elements
logical processes, including the trafficking of molecules to of protein structures can be generated very rapidly; for exam-
specific cellular locations and the regulation of cellular ple, individual a-helices are able to form in less than 100 ns,
growth and differentiation2. In addition, only correctly and b-turns in as little as 1 ms (refs 8, 9). Indeed, the folding in
folded proteins have long-term stability in crowded biologi- vitroof some of the simplest proteins, such as small helical
cal environments and are able to interact selectively with bundles, is completed in less than 50 ms (refs 10, 11).Intrigu-
their natural partners. It is therefore not surprising that the ingly, some other small proteins, particularly those

Chunk 3:
ms (refs 8, 9). Indeed, the folding in
folded proteins have long-term stability in crowded biologi- vitroof some of the simplest proteins, such as small helical
cal environments and are able to interact selectively with bundles, is completed in less than 50 ms (refs 10, 11).Intrigu-
their natural partners. It is therefore not surprising that the ingly, some other small proteins, particularly those based on
failure of proteins to fold correctly, or to remain correctly b-sheet structures, can take many orders of magnitude
folded, is the origin of a wide variety of pathological condi- longer to fold, as we see below, but such rate changes can be
tions. In this article we explore the underlying mechanism of understood to a significant extent in terms of the character-
protein folding and of the nature and consequences of istics of the native structures12.
misfolding and its links with disease. A key question is how does the correct fold emerge from
such fundamental steps; that is, how is the energy landscape
The fundamental mechanism of protein folding unique to a specific protein defined by its amino-acid
The concept of an energy landscape sequence. The structural transitions taking place during
The mechanism by which a polypeptide chain folds to a spe- folding in vitrocan be investigated in detail by a variety of
cific three-dimensional protein structure has until recently techniques, ranging from optical methods to NMR spec-
been shrouded in mystery. Native states of proteins almost troscopy3, some of which can now even be used to follow the
always correspond to the structures that are most thermody- behaviour of single molecules13. The latter capability is of
namically stable under physiological conditions3. Neverthe- particular significance in the context of probing the stochas-
less, the total number of possible conformations of any tic nature of the folding process (see Fig. 1). Studies of a
polypeptide chain is so large that a systematic search for this series o

Chunk 4:
es that are most thermody- behaviour of single molecules13. The latter capability is of
namically stable under physiological conditions3. Neverthe- particular significance in the context of probing the stochas-
less, the total number of possible conformations of any tic nature of the folding process (see Fig. 1). Studies of a
polypeptide chain is so large that a systematic search for this series of small proteins, typically with 60–100 residues, have
particular structure would take an astronomical length of been crucial for investigating the most basic steps in folding
time. However, it is now clear that the folding process does because these proteins convert from their unfolded states to
not involve a series of mandatory steps between specific part- their native states without the complication of highly popu-
ly folded states, but rather a stochastic search of the many lated intermediates. For these systems, monitoring the
conformations accessible to a polypeptide chain3–5. The effects of specific mutations on the kinetics of folding and
inherent fluctuations in the conformation of an unfolded or unfolding has proved to be a seminal technique, because of
incompletely folded polypeptide chain enable even residues its ability to probe the role of individual residues in the fold-
that are highly separated in the amino-acid sequence to come ing process14. Particular insight has come from the use of this
into contact with one other. Because, on average, native-like approach to analyse the transition states for folding, namely
interactions between residues are more stable than non- the critical regions of energy surfaces through which all
native ones, they are more persistent and the polypeptide molecules must pass to reach the native fold (see Fig. 1). The
chain is able to find its lowest-energy structure by a process of results of many studies of these species suggest that the
884 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---

Chunk 5:
on- the critical regions of energy surfaces through which all
native ones, they are more persistent and the polypeptide molecules must pass to reach the native fold (see Fig. 1). The
chain is able to find its lowest-energy structure by a process of results of many studies of these species suggest that the
884 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Figure 1A schematic energy landscape
for protein folding. The surface is derived
Representative starting structures from a computer simulation of the folding
of a highly simplified model of a small
protein. The surface ‘funnels’ the
multitude of denatured conformations to
the unique native structure. The critical
region on a simple surface such as this
one is the saddle point corresponding to
the transition state, the barrier that all
molecules must cross if they are to fold to
the native state. Superimposed on this
schematic surface are ensembles of
Transition state
structures corresponding to different
stages of the folding process. The
transition state ensemble was calculated
by using computer simulations
constrained by experimental data from
mutational studies of acylphosphatase18.
The yellow spheres in this ensemble
Saddle point
represent the three ‘key residues’ in the
structure; when these residues have
Free energy formed their native-like contacts the
Number of native overall topology of the native fold is
interactions established. The structure of the native
state is shown at the bottom of the
surface; at the top are indicated
schematically some contributors to the
Native structure distribution of unfolded species that
Number of residue contacts represent the starting point for folding.
Also indicated on the surface are highly
simplified trajectories for the folding of
individual molecules. Adapted from
ref. 6.
fundamental mechanism of protein folding involves the interaction bonding between the amide and carbonyl groups of th

Chunk 6:
ically some contributors to the
Native structure distribution of unfolded species that
Number of residue contacts represent the starting point for folding.
Also indicated on the surface are highly
simplified trajectories for the folding of
individual molecules. Adapted from
ref. 6.
fundamental mechanism of protein folding involves the interaction bonding between the amide and carbonyl groups of the main chain.
of a relatively small number of residues to form a folding nucleus, The formation of such structure is an important element in the over-
about which the remainder of the structure rapidly condenses15. all folding process, although it might not have as fundamental a role
More details of how such a mechanism is able to generate a as the establishment of the overall chain topology19. Perhaps the most
unique fold have emerged from a range of theoretical studies, par- dramatic evidence for such a conclusion is the observation of a
ticularly involving computer simulation techniques16. Of particu- remarkable correlation between the experimental folding rates of a
lar significance are investigations that compare the simulation wide range of small proteins and the complexity of their folds, mea-
results with experimental observations6,17. One approach incorpo- sured by the contact order12. The latter is the average separation in the
rates experimental measurements directly into the simulations as sequence between residues that are in contact with each other in the
restraints limiting the regions of conformational space that are native structure. The existence of such a correlation can be rational-
explored in each simulation; this strategy has enabled rather ized by the argument that a stochastic search process will be more
detailed structures to be generated for transition states18(see Fig. 1). time consuming if the residues that form the nucleus are further away
The results suggest that, despite a high degree of disorder, these from each other in the sequence. This e

Chunk 7:
tion can be rational-
explored in each simulation; this strategy has enabled rather ized by the argument that a stochastic search process will be more
detailed structures to be generated for transition states18(see Fig. 1). time consuming if the residues that form the nucleus are further away
The results suggest that, despite a high degree of disorder, these from each other in the sequence. This evidence strongly supports the
structures have the same overall topology as the native fold. In conclusion that there are relatively simple underlying principles by
essence, interactions involving the key residues force the chain to which the sequence of a protein encodes its structure20. Not only will
adopt a rudimentary native-like architecture. Although it is not yet the establishment of such principles reveal in more depth how pro-
clear exactly how the sequence encodes such characteristics, the teins are able to fold, but it should advance significantly our ability to
essential elements of the fold are likely to be determined primarily predict protein folds directly from their sequences and to design
by the pattern of hydrophobic and polar residues that favours pref- sequences that encode novel folds.
erential interactions of specific residues as the structure becomes For proteins with more than about 100 residues, experiments
increasingly compact. Once the correct topology has been generally reveal that one (or more) intermediate is significantly pop-
achieved, the native structure will then almost invariably be gener- ulated during the folding process. There has, however, been consider-
ated during the final stages of folding18. Conversely, if these key able discussion about the significance of such species: whether they
interactions are not formed, the protein cannot fold to a stable assist the protein to find its correct structure or whether they are traps
globular structure; this mechanism therefore acts also as a ‘quality- that inhibit the folding process21–23. Re

Chunk 8:
n consider-
ated during the final stages of folding18. Conversely, if these key able discussion about the significance of such species: whether they
interactions are not formed, the protein cannot fold to a stable assist the protein to find its correct structure or whether they are traps
globular structure; this mechanism therefore acts also as a ‘quality- that inhibit the folding process21–23. Regardless of the outcome of this
control’ process by which misfolding can generally be avoided. debate, the structural properties of intermediates provide important
evidence about the folding of these larger proteins. In particular, they
The determinants of protein folds suggest that these proteins generally fold in modules, in other words,
Secondary structure, the helices and sheets that are found in nearly folding can take place largely independently in different segments or
every native protein structure, is stabilized primarily by hydrogen domains of the protein6,14. In such cases, interactions involving key
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 885

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
residues are likely to establish the native-like fold within local regions Of particular importance in this context are the many molecular
or domains and also to ensure that the latter then interact appropri- chaperones that are present in all types of cells and cellular compart-
ately to form the correct overall structure23,24. The fully native struc- ments. Some chaperones interact with nascent chains as they emerge
ture is only acquired when all the native-like interactions have been from the ribosome, whereas others are involved in guiding later
formed both within and between the domains; this happens in a final stages of the folding process27,28. Molecular chaperones often work in
cooperative folding step when all the side chains become locked in tandem to ensure that the various stages in the folding of such systems
their unique 

Chunk 9:
n all the native-like interactions have been from the ribosome, whereas others are involved in guiding later
formed both within and between the domains; this happens in a final stages of the folding process27,28. Molecular chaperones often work in
cooperative folding step when all the side chains become locked in tandem to ensure that the various stages in the folding of such systems
their unique close-packed arrangement and water is excluded from are all completed efficiently. Many of the details of the functions of
the protein core25. This modular mechanism is appealing because it molecular chaperones have been determined from studies of their
suggests that highly complex structures might be assembled in man- effects on folding in vitro. The best characterized of the chaperones
ageable pieces. Moreover, such a principle can readily be extended to studied in this manner is the bacterial complex involving GroEL, a
describe the assembly of other macromolecules, particularly nucleic member of the family of ‘chaperonins’, and its ‘co-chaperone’ GroES.
acids, and even large ‘molecular machines’ such as the ribosome. Many aspects of the sophisticated mechanism through which this
coupled system functions are now well understood27,28. Of particular
Protein folding and misfolding in the cell interest is that GroEL, and other members of this class of molecular
In a cell, proteins are synthesized on ribosomes from the genetic chaperone, contains a cavity in which incompletely folded polypep-
information encoded in the cellular DNA. Folding in vivois in some tide chains can enter and undergo the final steps in the formation of
cases co-translational; that is, it is initiated before the completion of their native structures while sequestered and protected from the
protein synthesis, whereas the nascent chain is still attached to the outside world.
ribosome26. Other proteins, however, undergo the major part of their Molecular chaperones do not themselves increase the rate of ind

Chunk 10:
undergo the final steps in the formation of
cases co-translational; that is, it is initiated before the completion of their native structures while sequestered and protected from the
protein synthesis, whereas the nascent chain is still attached to the outside world.
ribosome26. Other proteins, however, undergo the major part of their Molecular chaperones do not themselves increase the rate of indi-
folding in the cytoplasm after release from the ribosome, whereas yet vidual steps in protein folding; rather, they increase the efficiency of
others fold in specific compartments, such as mitochondria or the the overall process by reducing the probability of competing reac-
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), after trafficking and translocation tions, particularly aggregation. However, there are several classes of
through membranes27,28. Many details of the folding process depend folding catalyst that accelerate potentially slow steps in the folding
on the particular environment in which folding takes place, although process. The most important are peptidylprolyl isomerases, which
the fundamental principles of folding, discussed above, are undoubt- increase the rate of cis–transisomerization of peptide bonds involving
edly universal. But because incompletely folded proteins must proline residues, and protein disulphide isomerases, which enhance
inevitably expose to the solvent at least some regions of structure that the rate of formation and reorganization of disulphide bonds30.
are buried in the native state, they are prone to inappropriate interac- Despite these factors, given the enormous complexity and the stochas-
tion with other molecules within the crowded environment of a cell29. tic nature of the folding process, it would be remarkable if misfolding
Living systems have therefore evolved a range of strategies to prevent never occurred. Clear evidence that molecular chaperones are needed
such behaviour27–29. to prevent misfolding and its consequences comes from the fact 

Chunk 11:
ormous complexity and the stochas-
tion with other molecules within the crowded environment of a cell29. tic nature of the folding process, it would be remarkable if misfolding
Living systems have therefore evolved a range of strategies to prevent never occurred. Clear evidence that molecular chaperones are needed
such behaviour27–29. to prevent misfolding and its consequences comes from the fact that
the concentrations of many of these species are substantially increased
during cellular stress; indeed, the designation of many as heat shock
Ribosome proteins (Hsps) reflects this fact. It is also clear that some molecular
Transport chaperones are able not only to protect proteins as they fold but also to
Transport out in
rescue misfolded and even aggregated proteins and enable them to
have a second chance to fold correctly27,28. Active intervention in the
Misfolded
Modification folding process requires energy, and ATP is required for most of the
and folding
Ubiquitin- molecular chaperones to function with full efficiency.
proteasome In eukaryotic systems, many of the proteins that are synthesized in
system
a cell are destined for secretion to the extracellular environment.
These proteins are translocated into the ER, where folding takes place
before secretion through the Golgi apparatus. The ER contains a wide
Correctly
folded range of molecular chaperones and folding catalysts, and in addition
the proteins that fold here must satisfy a ‘quality-control’ check
before being exported (Fig. 2)31,32. Such a process is particularly
important because there seem to be few molecular chaperones out-
side the cell, although one (clusterin), at least, has recently been dis-
covered33. This quality-control mechanism involves a remarkable
D p e r g o r t a e d in ed ER series of glycosylation and deglycosylation reactions that enables cor-
rectly folded proteins to be distinguished from misfolded ones31. The
importance of these regulatory systems is underlined by recent
experimen

Chunk 12:
 chaperones out-
side the cell, although one (clusterin), at least, has recently been dis-
covered33. This quality-control mechanism involves a remarkable
D p e r g o r t a e d in ed ER series of glycosylation and deglycosylation reactions that enables cor-
rectly folded proteins to be distinguished from misfolded ones31. The
importance of these regulatory systems is underlined by recent
experiments that suggest that a large fraction of all polypeptide
chains synthesized in a cell fail to pass this test and are targeted for
Vesicle degradation34. Like the ‘heat shock response’ in the cytoplasm, the
‘unfolded protein response’ in the ER is also stimulated (upregulated)
Golgi during stress and, as we shall see below, is strongly linked to the avoid-
ance of misfolding diseases35.
Figure 2Regulation of protein folding in the ER. Many newly synthesized proteins Folding and unfolding are the ultimate ways of generating and
are translocated into the ER, where they fold into their three-dimensional structures abolishing specific types of cellular activity. In addition, processes as
with the help of a series of molecular chaperones and folding catalysts (not shown). apparently diverse as translocation across membranes, trafficking,
Correctly folded proteins are then transported to the Golgi complex and then secretion, the immune response and regulation of the cell cycle are
delivered to the extracellular environment. However, incorrectly folded proteins are directly dependent on folding and unfolding events2. Failure to fold
detected by a quality-control mechanism and sent along another pathway (the correctly, or to remain correctly folded, will therefore give rise to the
unfolded protein response) in which they are ubiquitinated and then degraded in the malfunctioning of living systems and hence to disease36–38. Some of
cytoplasm by proteasomes. Adapted from ref. 32. these diseases (such as cystic fibrosis36and some types of cancer39)
result from proteins folding incorrect

Chunk 13:
other pathway (the correctly, or to remain correctly folded, will therefore give rise to the
unfolded protein response) in which they are ubiquitinated and then degraded in the malfunctioning of living systems and hence to disease36–38. Some of
cytoplasm by proteasomes. Adapted from ref. 32. these diseases (such as cystic fibrosis36and some types of cancer39)
result from proteins folding incorrectly and not being able to exercise
886 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
a b Figure 3A schematic representation of
the general mechanism of aggregation to
form amyloid fibrils. Unfolded or partially
unfolded proteins associate with each
other to form small, soluble aggregates
that undergo further assembly into
protofibrils or protofilaments (a) and then
mature fibrils (b, top electron microscope
images from ref. 44). The fibrils often
accumulate in plaques or other structures
c such as the Lewy bodies associated with
Parkinson’s disease (c, electron
microscope image on right). Some of the
early aggregates seem to be amorphous
or micellar in nature, although others
form ring-shaped species with diameters
of approximately 10 nm (d, electron
microscope image from ref. 53). Adapted
Amyloidogenic d from a figure provided by H. A. Lashuel
intermediate and P. T. Lansbury Jr.
Deposit
Amyloid fibril
their proper function; many such disorders are familial because the Although no structure of an amyloid fibril has yet been deter-
probability of misfolding is often greater in mutational variants. In mined in atomic detail, increasingly convincing models based on
other cases, proteins with a high propensity to misfold escape all the data from techniques such as X-ray fibre diffraction42, cryoelectron
protective mechanisms and form intractable aggregates within cells microscopy45and solid-state NMR46are emerging. The core struc-
or (more commonly) in extracellular space. An increasing number of t

Chunk 14:
ned in atomic detail, increasingly convincing models based on
other cases, proteins with a high propensity to misfold escape all the data from techniques such as X-ray fibre diffraction42, cryoelectron
protective mechanisms and form intractable aggregates within cells microscopy45and solid-state NMR46are emerging. The core struc-
or (more commonly) in extracellular space. An increasing number of ture of the fibrils seems to be stabilized primarily by interactions, par-
disorders, including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, the ticularly hydrogen bonds, involving the polypeptide main chain.
spongiform encephalopathies and type II diabetes, are directly asso- Because the main chain is common to all polypeptides, this observa-
ciated with the deposition of such aggregates in tissues, including the tion explains why fibrils formed from polypeptides of very different
brain, heart and spleen37,38,40,41. In the next section we look at the for- sequence seem to be so similar42,43. In some cases only a handful of the
mation of these species. residues of a given protein might be involved in this structure, with
the remainder of the chain being associated in some other manner
Protein aggregation and amyloid formation with the fibrillar assembly; in other cases almost the whole polypep-
Each amyloid disease involves predominantly the aggregation of a tide chain seems to be involved. The generic amyloid structure con-
specific protein, although a range of other components including trasts strongly with the highly individualistic globular structures of
additional proteins and carbohydrates are incorporated into the most natural proteins. In these latter structures the interactions asso-
deposits when they form in vivo. In neurodegenerative diseases, the ciated with the very specific packing of the side chains seem to over-
quantities of aggregates involved can sometimes be so small as to be ride the main-chain preferences43,44.
almost undetectable, whereas in some systemic di

Chunk 15:
drates are incorporated into the most natural proteins. In these latter structures the interactions asso-
deposits when they form in vivo. In neurodegenerative diseases, the ciated with the very specific packing of the side chains seem to over-
quantities of aggregates involved can sometimes be so small as to be ride the main-chain preferences43,44.
almost undetectable, whereas in some systemic diseases literally kilo- Even though the ability to form amyloid fibrils seems to be generic,
grams of protein can be found in one or more organs40. The charac- the propensity to do so under given circumstances can vary markedly
teristics of the soluble forms of the 20 or so proteins involved in the between different sequences. The relative aggregation rates for a wide
well-defined amyloidoses are very varied — they range from intact range of peptides and proteins correlates with the physicochemical
globular proteins to largely unstructured peptide molecules — but features of the molecules such as charge, secondary-structure
the aggregated forms have many characteristics in common42. Amy- propensities and hydrophobicity47. In a globular protein the
loid deposits all show specific optical behaviour (such as birefrin- polypeptide main chain and the hydrophobic side chains are largely
gence) on binding certain dye molecules such as Congo red. The fib- buried within the folded structure. Only when they are exposed, for
rillar structures typical of many of the aggregates have very similar example when the protein is partly unfolded (for example, at low pH)
morphologies (long, unbranched and often twisted structures a few or fragmented (for example, by proteolysis), will conversion into
nanometres in diameter) and a characteristic ‘cross-b’ X-ray fibre amyloid fibrils be possible. Experiments in vitroindicate that their
diffraction pattern. The latter reveals that the organized core struc- formation is then generally characterized by a lag phase, followed by a
ture is composed of b

Chunk 16:
nd often twisted structures a few or fragmented (for example, by proteolysis), will conversion into
nanometres in diameter) and a characteristic ‘cross-b’ X-ray fibre amyloid fibrils be possible. Experiments in vitroindicate that their
diffraction pattern. The latter reveals that the organized core struc- formation is then generally characterized by a lag phase, followed by a
ture is composed of b-sheets whose strands run perpendicular to the period of rapid growth48,49. Such behaviour is typical of nucleated
fibril axis42. The ability of polypeptide chains to form amyloid struc- processes such as crystallization; the lag phase can be eliminated by
tures is not restricted to the relatively small number of proteins asso- the addition of preformed aggregates to fresh solutions, a process
ciated with recognized clinical disorders, and it now seems to be a known as seeding. An interesting recent suggestion is that seeding by
generic feature of polypeptide chains37,43. The most compelling evi- chemically modified forms of proteins, resulting for example from
dence for the latter statement is that fibrils can be formed in vitroby deamidation or oxidative stress, might in some cases be an important
many other peptides and proteins, including such well-known factor in triggering the aggregation process and the onset of disease50.
molecules as myoglobin, and also by homopolymers such as poly- There are striking similarities in the aggregation behaviour of dif-
threonine or polylysine37,44. ferent peptides and proteins (Fig. 3)48,49. The first phase in amyloid
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 887

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Figure 4A unified view of some of the
Disordered Disordered
types of structure that can be formed by
aggregate aggregate
polypeptide chains. An unstructured
chain, for example newly synthesized on
Oligomer
a ribosome, can fold to a monomeric
native structure, often through one or
more part

Chunk 17:
EMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 887

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Figure 4A unified view of some of the
Disordered Disordered
types of structure that can be formed by
aggregate aggregate
polypeptide chains. An unstructured
chain, for example newly synthesized on
Oligomer
a ribosome, can fold to a monomeric
native structure, often through one or
more partly folded intermediates. It can,
Fibre
however, experience other fates such as
degradation or aggregation. An amyloid
fibril is just one form of aggregate, but it
is unique in having a highly organized
‘misfolded’ structure, as shown in Fig. 3.
Synthesis Unfolded Intermediate Native O ol t ig h o e m r a e s r s s e , m m b a l c ie ro s, m in o c le lu c d u i l n a g r c fu o n m c p ti l o e n xe a s l
Crystal and natural protein fibres, contain
natively folded molecules, as do the
protein crystals produced in vitrofor X-
ray diffraction studies of their structures.
The populations and interconversions of
the various states are determined by their
relative thermodynamic and kinetic
stabilities under any given conditions. In
Disordered Degraded Prefibrillar living systems, however, transitions
aggregate fragments species between the different states are highly
regulated by the environment and by the
presence of molecular chaperones,
proteolytic enzymes and other factors.
Failure of such regulatory mechanisms is
likely to be a major factor in the onset and
development of misfolding diseases.
Adapted from ref. 54.
Amyloid
fibril
formation seems to involve the formation of soluble oligomers as a tems have almost universally avoided the deliberate formation of
result of relatively nonspecific interactions, although, in some cases, such material. Nevertheless, there is increasing evidence that the
specific structural transitions, such as domain swapping, might be unique properties of amyloid structures have been exploited by some
important51. The earliest species visible by el

Chunk 18:
ligomers as a tems have almost universally avoided the deliberate formation of
result of relatively nonspecific interactions, although, in some cases, such material. Nevertheless, there is increasing evidence that the
specific structural transitions, such as domain swapping, might be unique properties of amyloid structures have been exploited by some
important51. The earliest species visible by electron or atomic-force species, including bacteria, fungi and even mammals, for specific
microscopy generally resemble small bead-like structures, some- (and carefully regulated) purposes55–57.
times linked together, and often described as amorphous aggregates There is evidence that evolutionary selection has tended to avoid
or as micelles. These early ‘prefibrillar aggregates’ then transform amino-acid sequences, such as alternating polar and hydrophobic
into species with more distinctive morphologies, often called residues, that favour a b-sheet structure of the type seen in amyloid
‘protofilaments’ or ‘protofibrils’. These structures are commonly fibrils58. Moreover, recent studies suggest that the aggregation
short, thin, sometimes curly, fibrillar species that are thought to process that results in amyloid fibrils is nucleated in a similar manner
assemble into mature fibrils, perhaps by lateral association accompa- to that of folding, but that the residues involved might well be located
nied by some degree of structural reorganization. The aggregates that in different regions of the sequence from those that nucleate fold-
form first are likely to be relatively disorganized structures that ing59. Such ‘kinetic partitioning’ means that mutations that occur
expose to the outside world a variety of segments of the protein that during evolution could be selected for their ability to enhance folding
are normally buried in the globular state52. In some cases, however, at the expense of aggregation. However, it is apparent that biological
these early aggregates appear to adopt

Chunk 19:
uctures that ing59. Such ‘kinetic partitioning’ means that mutations that occur
expose to the outside world a variety of segments of the protein that during evolution could be selected for their ability to enhance folding
are normally buried in the globular state52. In some cases, however, at the expense of aggregation. However, it is apparent that biological
these early aggregates appear to adopt quite distinctive structures, systems have become robust not just by careful manipulation of the
including well-defined annular species53(see Fig. 3). sequences of proteins but also by controlling, by means of molecular
chaperones and degradation mechanisms, the particular state adopt-
Molecular evolution and the control of protein misfolding ed by a given polypeptide chain at a given time and under given con-
The state of a protein that is adopted under specific conditions ditions. This process can be thought of as being analogous to the way
depends on the relative thermodynamic stabilities of the various in which biology regulates and controls the various chemical trans-
accessible conformations and on the kinetics of their interconversion formations that take place in the cell by means of enzymes. And just as
(Fig. 4)37,54. Amyloid fibrils are just one of the types of aggregate that the aberrant behaviour of enzymes can cause metabolic disease, the
can be formed by proteins, although a significant feature of this par- aberrant behaviour of the chaperone and other machinery regulating
ticular species is that its highly organized hydrogen-bonded struc- polypeptide conformations can contribute to misfolding and
ture is likely to give it unique kinetic stability. Thus, once formed, aggregation diseases35,60.
such aggregates can persist for long periods, allowing a progressive The ideas encapsulated in Fig. 4 therefore serve as a framework for
build-up of deposits in tissue, and indeed enabling seeding of the understanding the fundamental events that underlie misfolding dis-

Chunk 20:
an contribute to misfolding and
ture is likely to give it unique kinetic stability. Thus, once formed, aggregation diseases35,60.
such aggregates can persist for long periods, allowing a progressive The ideas encapsulated in Fig. 4 therefore serve as a framework for
build-up of deposits in tissue, and indeed enabling seeding of the understanding the fundamental events that underlie misfolding dis-
subsequent conversion of additional quantities of the same protein eases. For example, many of the mutations associated with the famil-
into amyloid fibrils. It is therefore not surprising that biological sys- ial forms of deposition diseases increase the population of partially
888 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
unfolded states, and hence the propensity to aggregate, by decreasing Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng.37,868–893 (1998).
the stability or cooperativity of the native state37,41,61,62. Other familial 4. Wolynes, P. G., Onuchic, J. N. & Thirumalai, D. Navigating the folding routes. Science267,1619–1620
diseases are associated with the accumulation of amyloid deposits (1995).
5. Dill, K. A. & Chan, H. S. From Levinthal to pathways to funnels. Nature Struct. Biol.4,10–19 (1997).
whose primary components are fragments of native proteins; such
6. Dinner, A. R., Sali, A., Smith, L. J., Dobson, C. M. & Karplus, M. Understanding protein folding via
fragments can be produced by aberrant processing or incomplete free energy surfaces from theory and experiment. Trends Biochem. Sci.25,331–339 (2000).
proteolysis, and are unable to fold into aggregation-resistant states. 7. Baldwin, R. L. Protein folding: matching speed and stability. Nature369,183–184 (1994).
Other pathogenic mutations enhance the propensities of such 8. Eaton, W. A., Munoz, V., Thompson, P. A., Henry, E. R. & Hofrichter, J. Kinetics and dynamics of
loops, a-helices, b-hairpins, and fast-folding proteins. Acc. Chem. Res.

Chunk 21:
000).
proteolysis, and are unable to fold into aggregation-resistant states. 7. Baldwin, R. L. Protein folding: matching speed and stability. Nature369,183–184 (1994).
Other pathogenic mutations enhance the propensities of such 8. Eaton, W. A., Munoz, V., Thompson, P. A., Henry, E. R. & Hofrichter, J. Kinetics and dynamics of
loops, a-helices, b-hairpins, and fast-folding proteins. Acc. Chem. Res.31,745–753 (1998).
species to aggregate, for example by increasing their hydrophobicity
9. Snow, C. D., Nguyen, H., Pande, V. S. & Gruebele, M. Absolute comparison of simulated and
or decreasing their charge47. And, in the prion disorders such as Kuru experimental protein-folding dynamics. Nature420,102–106 (2002).
or Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, it seems that ingestion of pre-aggregat- 10.Yang, W. Y. & Gruebele, M. Folding at the speed limit. Nature423,193–197 (2003).
11.Mayor, U. et al. The complete folding pathway of a protein from nanoseconds to microseconds.
ed states of an identical protein, for example by voluntary or involun-
Nature421,863–867 (2003).
tary cannibalism or through the use of contaminated pharmaceuti- 12.Plaxco, K. W., Simons, K. T. & Baker, D. Contact order, transition state placement and the refolding
cals or surgical instruments, can markedly increase the inherent rate rates of single domain proteins. J. Mol. Biol.277,985–994 (1998).
of aggregation through seeding and hence can generate a mechanism 13.Schuler, B., Lipman, E. A. & Eaton, W. A. Probing the free-energy surface for protein folding with
for transmission48,63. single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy. Nature419,743–747 (2002).
14.Fersht, A. R. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein
In some aggregation diseases, the large quantities of insoluble pro- Folding(W.H. Freeman, New York, 1999).
tein involved can physically disrupt specific organs and thereby cause 15.Fersht, A. R. Transition-state structure as a unifying basis in protein-folding mechan

Chunk 22:
opy. Nature419,743–747 (2002).
14.Fersht, A. R. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein
In some aggregation diseases, the large quantities of insoluble pro- Folding(W.H. Freeman, New York, 1999).
tein involved can physically disrupt specific organs and thereby cause 15.Fersht, A. R. Transition-state structure as a unifying basis in protein-folding mechanisms: contact
pathological behaviour40. But for neurodegenerative disorders, such order, chain topology, stability, and the extended nucleus mechanism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA97,
1525–1529 (2000).
as Alzheimer’s disease, the primary symptoms almost certainly result
16.Shea, J. E. & Brooks, C. L. From folding surfaces to folding proteins: a review and assessment of
from a ‘toxic gain of function’ associated with aggregation64. The early simulation studies of protein folding and unfolding. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.52,499–535 (2001).
prefibrillar aggregates of proteins associated with such diseases are 17.Fersht, A. R. & Daggett, V. Protein folding and unfolding at atomic resolution. Cell108,573–582
(2002).
highly damaging to cells; by contrast, the mature fibrils are usually rel-
18.Vendruscolo, M., Paci, E., Dobson, C. M. & Karplus, M. Three key residues form a critical contact
atively benign48,65. Moreover, experiments have recently suggested network in a transition state for protein folding. Nature409,641–646 (2001).
that similar aggregates of proteins that are not connected with any 19.Makarov, D. E. & Plaxco, K. W. The topomer search model: a simple, quantitative theory of two-state
known diseases could be equally cytotoxic52. The generic nature of protein folding kinetics. Protein Sci.12,17–26 (2003).
20.Baker, D. A surprising simplicity to protein folding. Nature405,39–42 (2000).
such aggregates and their effects on cells has recently been supported
21.Roder, H. & Colon, W. Kinetic role of early intermediates in protein folding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
by the remarkab

Chunk 23:
ate
known diseases could be equally cytotoxic52. The generic nature of protein folding kinetics. Protein Sci.12,17–26 (2003).
20.Baker, D. A surprising simplicity to protein folding. Nature405,39–42 (2000).
such aggregates and their effects on cells has recently been supported
21.Roder, H. & Colon, W. Kinetic role of early intermediates in protein folding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
by the remarkable finding that antibodies can cross-react with early 7,15–28 (1997).
aggregates of different peptides and proteins, and moreover inhibit 22.Sanchez, I. E. & Kiefhaber, T. Evidence for sequential barriers and obligatory intermediates in
their toxicity66. It is possible that there are specific mechanisms for this apparent two-state protein folding. J. Mol. Biol.325,367–376 (2003).
23.Khan, F., Chuang, J. I., Gianni, S. & Fersht, A. R. The kinetic pathway of folding of barnase. J. Mol.
toxicity, for example as a result of annular species (Fig. 3) that resem-
Biol.333,169–186 (2003).
ble the toxins produced by bacteria that form pores in membranes and 24.Vendruscolo, M., Paci, E., Karplus, M. & Dobson, C. M. Structures and relative free energies of
disrupt the ion balance in cells53. However, it is likely that the relatively partially folded states of proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA100,14817–14821 (2003).
25.Cheung, M. S., Garcia, A. E. & Onuchic, J. N. Protein folding mediated by solvation: water expulsion
disorganized prefibrillar aggregates are also harmful to cells, probably
and formation of the hydrophobic core occur after the structural collapse. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
through a less specific mechanism, for example as a result of the expo- 99,685–690 (2002).
sure of non-native hydrophobic surfaces stimulating aberrant inter- 26.Hardesty, B. & Kramer, G. Folding of a nascent peptide on the ribosome. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol.
actions with cell membranes or other cellular components67. Biol.66,41–66 (2001).
27.Bukau, B. & Horwich, A. L. The Hsp70 and Hsp60 chapero

Chunk 24:
rough a less specific mechanism, for example as a result of the expo- 99,685–690 (2002).
sure of non-native hydrophobic surfaces stimulating aberrant inter- 26.Hardesty, B. & Kramer, G. Folding of a nascent peptide on the ribosome. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol.
actions with cell membranes or other cellular components67. Biol.66,41–66 (2001).
27.Bukau, B. & Horwich, A. L. The Hsp70 and Hsp60 chaperone machines. Cell92,351 –366 (1998).
28.Hartl, F. U. & Hayer-Hartl, M. Molecular chaperones in the cytosol: from nascent chain to folded
Future directions protein. Science295,1852–1858 (2002).
In normal circumstances the molecular chaperones and other 29.Ellis, R. J. Macromolecular crowding: an important but neglected aspect of the intracellular
‘housekeeping’ mechanisms are remarkably efficient in ensuring that environment. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.11,114–119 (2001).
30.Schiene, C. & Fischer, G. Enzymes that catalyse the restructuring of proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
such potentially toxic species as prefibrillar aggregates are neutral-
10,40–45 (2000).
ized before they can do any damage28,68. This neutralization could 31.Hammon, C. & Helenius, A. Quality control in the secretory pathway. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol.7,
result simply from the efficient targeting of misfolded proteins for 523–529 (1995).
32.Kaufman, R. J. et al. The unfolded protein response in nutrient sensing and differentiation. Nature
degradation, but it seems that molecular chaperones are also able to
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.3,411–421 (2002).
alter the partitioning between harmful and harmless forms of aggre- 33.Wilson, M. R. & Easterbrook Smith, S. B. Clusterin is a secreted mammalian chaperone. Trends
gates (Fig. 4)69. If the efficiency of these protective mechanisms is Biochem. Sci.25, 95–98 (2000).
impaired, however, the probability of pathogenic behaviour 34.Schubert, U. et al. Rapid degradation of a large fraction of newly synthesized proteins by proteasomes.
increases35,68. Such a process would expl

Chunk 25:
ilson, M. R. & Easterbrook Smith, S. B. Clusterin is a secreted mammalian chaperone. Trends
gates (Fig. 4)69. If the efficiency of these protective mechanisms is Biochem. Sci.25, 95–98 (2000).
impaired, however, the probability of pathogenic behaviour 34.Schubert, U. et al. Rapid degradation of a large fraction of newly synthesized proteins by proteasomes.
increases35,68. Such a process would explain why most of the amyloid Nature404,770–774 (2000).
35.Bence, N. F., Sampat, R. M. & Kopito, R. R. Impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system by
diseases are associated with old age, when there is likely to be an protein aggregation. Science292,1552–1555 (2001).
increased tendency for proteins to become misfolded or damaged, 36.Thomas, P. J., Qu, B. H. & Pedersen, P. L. Defective protein folding as a basis of human disease. Trends
coupled with a decreased efficiency of the molecular chaperone and Biochem. Sci.20,456–459 (1995).
37.Dobson, C. M. The structural basis of protein folding and its links with human disease. Phil. Trans. R.
unfolded proteins responses70. It is ironic that through our success in
Soc. Lond. B356,133–145 (2001).
increasing the life expectancy of the populations of the developed 38.Horwich, A. Protein aggregation in disease: a role for folding intermediates forming specific
world, we are now seeing the limitations of our proteins and of the multimeric interactions. J. Clin. Invest.110,1221–1232 (2002).
regulatory mechanisms that control their behaviour71. It is therefore 39.Bullock, A. N. & Fersht, A. R. Rescuing the functions of mutant p53. Nature Rev. Cancer1,68–76
(2001).
essential that we use our developing understanding of misfolding 40.Tan, S. Y. & Pepys, M. B. Amyloidosis. Histopathology25,403–414 (1994).
and aggregation to find effective strategies for combating these 41.Kelly, J. W. Alternative conformation of amyloidogenic proteins and their multi-step assembly
increasingly common and highly debilitating diseases54. Fortunately, pathways

Chunk 26:
ancer1,68–76
(2001).
essential that we use our developing understanding of misfolding 40.Tan, S. Y. & Pepys, M. B. Amyloidosis. Histopathology25,403–414 (1994).
and aggregation to find effective strategies for combating these 41.Kelly, J. W. Alternative conformation of amyloidogenic proteins and their multi-step assembly
increasingly common and highly debilitating diseases54. Fortunately, pathways. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.8, 101–106 (1998).
42.Sunde, M. & Blake, C. C. F. The structure of amyloid fibrils by electron microscopy and X-ray
there is now real evidence to suggest that modern science will rise suc-
diffraction. Adv. Protein Chem.50,123–159 (1997).
cessfully to this tremendous challenge. nn 43.Dobson, C. M. Protein misfolding, evolution and disease. Trends Biochem. Sci.24,329–332 (1999).
44.Fändrich, M. & Dobson, C. M. The behaviour of polyamino acids reveals an inverse side-chain effect
in amyloid structure formation. EMBO J.21,5682–5690 (2002).
doi:10.1038/nature02261
45. Jiménez, J. L. et al. Cryo-electron microscopy of an SH3 amyloid fibril and model of the molecular
1. Vendruscolo, M., Zurdo, J., MacPhee, C. E. & Dobson, C. M. Protein folding and misfolding: a packing. EMBO J.18,815–821 (1999).
paradigm of self-assembly and regulation in complex biological systems. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 46. Petkova, A. T. et al. A structural model for Alzheimer’s b-amyloid fibrils based on experimental
361, 1205–1222 (2003). constraints from solid state NMR. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA99,16742–16747 (2002).
2. Radford, S. E. & Dobson, C. M. From computer simulations to human disease: emerging themes in 47.Chiti, F., Stefani, M., Taddei, N., Ramponi, G. & Dobson, C. M. Rationalization of mutational effects
protein folding. Cell97,291–298 (1999). on protein aggregation rates. Nature424,805–808 (2003).
3. Dobson, C. M., Sali, A. & Karplus, M. Protein folding: a perspective from theory and experiment. 48.Caughey, B. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. Protofibrils, pores, fibrils, an

Chunk 27:
n disease: emerging themes in 47.Chiti, F., Stefani, M., Taddei, N., Ramponi, G. & Dobson, C. M. Rationalization of mutational effects
protein folding. Cell97,291–298 (1999). on protein aggregation rates. Nature424,805–808 (2003).
3. Dobson, C. M., Sali, A. & Karplus, M. Protein folding: a perspective from theory and experiment. 48.Caughey, B. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. Protofibrils, pores, fibrils, and neurodegeneration: separating the
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 889

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
responsible protein aggregates from the innocent bystanders. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.26,267–298 (2003). 61.Ramirez-Alvarado, M., Merkel, J. S. & Regan, L. A systematic exploration of the influence of the
49.Bitan, G. et al. Amyloid b-protein (Ab) assembly: Ab40 and Ab42 oligomerize through distinct protein stability on amyloid fibril formation in vitro. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA97, 8979–8984 (2000).
pathways. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA100,330–335 (2003). 62.Dumoulin, M. et al. A camelid antibody fragment inhibits amyloid fibril formation by human
50.Nilsson, M. R., Driscoll, M. & Raleigh, D. P. Low levels of asparagine deamidation can have a dramatic lysozyme. Nature424, 783–788 (2003).
effect on aggregation of amyloidogenic peptides: implications for the study of amyloid formation. 63.Prusiner, S. B. Prion diseases and the BSE crisis. Science278,245–251 (1997).
Protein Sci.11,342–349 (2002). 64.Taylor, J. P., Hardy, J. & Fischbeck, K. H. Toxic proteins in neurodegenerative disease. Science296,
51.Schlunegger, M. P., Bennett, M. J. & Eisenberg, D. Oligomer formation by 3D domain swapping: a 1991–1995 (2002).
model for protein assembly and misassembly. Adv. Protein Chem.50, 61–122 (1997). 65.Walsh, D. M. et al. Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid bprotein potently inhibit hippocampal
52.Bucciantini, M. et al. Inherent cytotoxicity of aggregates implies a common origin for protein long-term potentiation in vivo

Chunk 28:
nett, M. J. & Eisenberg, D. Oligomer formation by 3D domain swapping: a 1991–1995 (2002).
model for protein assembly and misassembly. Adv. Protein Chem.50, 61–122 (1997). 65.Walsh, D. M. et al. Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid bprotein potently inhibit hippocampal
52.Bucciantini, M. et al. Inherent cytotoxicity of aggregates implies a common origin for protein long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature416,535–539 (2002).
misfolding diseases. Nature416,507–511 (2002). 66.Kayed, R. et al. Common structure of soluble amyloid oligomers implies common mechanisms of
53.Lashuel, H. A., Hartley, D., Petre, B. M., Walz, T. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr. Neurodegenerative disease: pathogenesis. Science300,486–489 (2003).
amyloid pores from pathogenic mutations. Nature418,291 (2002). 67.Stefani, M. & Dobson, C. M. Protein aggregation and aggregate toxicity: new insights into protein
54.Dobson, C. M. Protein folding and disease: a view from the First Horizon Symposium. Nature Rev. folding, misfolding diseases and biological evolution. J. Mol. Med.81,678–699 (2003).
Drug Discov.2,154–160 (2003). 68.Sherman, M. Y. & Goldberg, A. L. Cellular defenses against unfolded proteins: a cell biologist thinks
55.True, H. L. & Lindquist, S. L. A yeast prion provides a mechanism for genetic variation and about neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron29,15–32 (2001).
phenotypic diversity. Nature407,477–483 (2000). 69.Muchowski, P. J. et al. Hsp70 and Hsp40 chaperones can inhibit self-assembly of polyglutamine
56.Chapman, M. R. et al. Role of Escherichia colicurli operons in directing amyloid fiber formation. proteins into amyloid-like fibrils. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA97,7841–7846 (2000).
Science295,851–855 (2002). 70.Csermely, P. Chaperone overload is a possible contributor to ‘civilization diseases’. Trends Genet. 17,
57. Kelly, J. W. & Balch, W. E. Amyloid as a natural product. J. Cell Biol.161,461–462 (2003). 701–704 (2001).
58.Broome, B. M. & Hecht, M. H. Nature disfavours sequences of alternating p

Chunk 29:
teins into amyloid-like fibrils. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA97,7841–7846 (2000).
Science295,851–855 (2002). 70.Csermely, P. Chaperone overload is a possible contributor to ‘civilization diseases’. Trends Genet. 17,
57. Kelly, J. W. & Balch, W. E. Amyloid as a natural product. J. Cell Biol.161,461–462 (2003). 701–704 (2001).
58.Broome, B. M. & Hecht, M. H. Nature disfavours sequences of alternating polar and non-polar amino 71.Dobson, C. M. Getting out of shape—protein misfolding diseases. Nature418,729–730 (2002).
acids: implications for amyloidogenesis.J. Mol. Biol.296,961–968 (2000).
59.Chiti, F. et al. Kinetic partitioning of protein folding and aggregation. Nature Struct. Biol.9,137–143 AcknowledgementsI should like to thank in particular the Wellcome Trust, the
(2002). Leverhulme Trust and the UK Research Councils for generous support over many years,
60.Macario, A. J. L. & Macario, E. C. Sick chaperones and ageing: a perspective. Ageing Res. Rev.1, without whom my own research activities in this area of science could not have been
295–311 (2002). carried out.
890 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---



