Chunk 1:
insight review articles
Protein degradation and protection
against misfolded or damaged proteins
Alfred L. Goldberg
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
(e-mail: alfred_goldberg@hms.harvard.edu)
The ultimate mechanism that cells use to ensure the quality of intracellular proteins is the selective
destruction of misfolded or damaged polypeptides. In eukaryotic cells, the large ATP-dependent proteolytic
machine, the 26S proteasome, prevents the accumulation of non-functional, potentially toxic proteins. This
process is of particular importance in protecting cells against harsh conditions (for example, heat shock or
oxidative stress) and in a variety of diseases (for example, cystic fibrosis and the major neurodegenerative
diseases). A full understanding of the pathogenesis of the protein-folding diseases will require greater
knowledge of how misfolded proteins are recognized and selectively degraded.
P
roteins within cells are continually being Structural alterations lead to rapid degradation
degraded to amino acids and replaced by The ability of cells to degrade abnormally folded proteins
newly synthesized proteins. This process is selectively was first demonstrated more than 30 years ago4
highly selective and precisely regulated1, and with the discovery that various treatments that perturb the
individual proteins are destroyed at widely dif- proper folding of proteins caused their rapid hydrolysis. In
ferent rates, with half-lives ranging from several minutes fact, these findings led to the initial recognition that a
to many days. In eukaryotic cells, most proteins destined protein’s structure determines not only its catalytic proper-
for degradation are labelled first by ubiquitin in an energy- ties but also its intracellular stability2. However, the precise
requiring process and then digested to small peptides by changes in conformation that are recognized by the cell’s
the large proteolytic complex, the 26S proteaso

Chunk 2:
ays. In eukaryotic cells, most proteins destined protein’s structure determines not only its catalytic proper-
for degradation are labelled first by ubiquitin in an energy- ties but also its intracellular stability2. However, the precise
requiring process and then digested to small peptides by changes in conformation that are recognized by the cell’s
the large proteolytic complex, the 26S proteasome. Indica- degradative machinery and that trigger rapid hydrolysis are
tive of the complexity and importance of this system is the not clear and have still not been studied systematically.
large number of gene products (perhaps a thousand) that Perhaps most illustrative are the early findings about
function in the degradation of different proteins in mam- degradation of abnormal globins in reticulocytes6,7, which
malian cells. In the past decade, there has been an explo- produce one very well-characterized protein, haemoglobin,
sion of interest in the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway, due almost exclusively. Because the powerful tools that are now
largely to the general recognition of its importance in the available to perturb protein structures (such as site-directed
regulation of cell division, gene expression and other key mutagenesis) were undreamt of then, those early studies
processes1. However, the cell’s degradative machinery followed the fate of proteins that had incorporated, in place of
must have evolved initially to serve a more fundamental the natural residues, amino-acid analogues that prevented the
homeostatic function — to serve as a quality-control protein from assuming its normal tertiary conformation2,4.
system that rapidly eliminates misfolded or damaged pro- Normally, haemoglobin is the most stable intra-
teins whose accumulation would interfere with normal cellular protein, lasting the lifespan of red cells (about 110
cell function and viability2–4. days). However, after the incorporation of a synthetic valine
Long before the appearance of the ubiquitin–p

Chunk 3:
ng its normal tertiary conformation2,4.
system that rapidly eliminates misfolded or damaged pro- Normally, haemoglobin is the most stable intra-
teins whose accumulation would interfere with normal cellular protein, lasting the lifespan of red cells (about 110
cell function and viability2–4. days). However, after the incorporation of a synthetic valine
Long before the appearance of the ubiquitin–protea- analogue, the abnormal globin had a half-life of 10 min
some pathway in eukaryotes, prokaryotes had evolved (refs 6, 7). These short-lived globins failed to bind haem or
elaborate proteolytic machinery to destroy misfolded pro- form tetramers, and instead formed amorphous aggregates
teins rapidly4,5. These intracellular proteolytic systems are before degradation (see below). Very similar events have
energy dependent and differ markedly in size and complexity since been observed in several human diseases, for example,
from the simple proteases that function in the extracellular the unstable haemoglobinopathies, in which mutations that
milieu, such as the pancreatic proteases that digest dietary prevent the binding of haem cause complete degradation
proteins. If such typical extracellular proteases were free in the within minutes of translation, leading to a severe anaemia8.
cytosol, they would quickly convert the cell into a bag of Wider recognition of the importance of this degradative
amino acids. The fundamental problem that evolution had to process occurred with the advent of recombinant DNA
solve was how to provide cells with the capacity to destroy technology in the 1980s and the discovery that many foreign
misfolded or damaged proteins rapidly without the non-spe- proteins expressed in bacteria fail to accumulate owing to
cific destruction of essential cell constituents. their rapid degradation. Many proteins of major medical
Here, I outline the key features of the degradative process, importance (such as insulin) cannot fold properly in
its importance for cell

Chunk 4:
0s and the discovery that many foreign
misfolded or damaged proteins rapidly without the non-spe- proteins expressed in bacteria fail to accumulate owing to
cific destruction of essential cell constituents. their rapid degradation. Many proteins of major medical
Here, I outline the key features of the degradative process, importance (such as insulin) cannot fold properly in
its importance for cell viability and the research that led to its Escherichia coli, are recognized as abnormal and are rapidly
elucidation. As discussed here and elsewhere in this Insight, degraded9. Successful expression of such proteins required
misfolded proteins can arise in cells by mutation and the development of mutant bacteria with reduced degrada-
through various postsynthetic events; they can be highly tive capacity or improved expression systems that over-
toxic, mainly because of their tendency to form intracellular whelm the proteolytic systems9.
aggregates. Greater knowledge about this proteolytic path- Although most of our knowledge about misfolded pro-
way will be crucial for understanding the pathogenesis of teins comes from mutated proteins, cells also rapidly
diseases resulting from failures in correct protein folding degrades abnormal proteins that result from errors in tran-
and in developing rational therapies. scription or translation. Accordingly, ribosomal mutations
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.n©at u2re0.0co3m N/naattuurree PublishingGroup 895

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Table 1Abnormal proteins rapidly degraded in cells rapidly degraded2. For example, ribosomal subunits, when not in
ribosomes, are very unstable in all cells. In human thalassaemia, there
Type of abnormality Cause
is an excess of a- and b-globin subunits not in tetramers that are
Incomplete proteins Nonsense mutations, incorporation of puromycin,
premature termination, proteolytic cleavage rapidly degraded within reticulocytes8. However, their destruction is
Missense proteins Mut

Chunk 5:
ribosomal subunits, when not in
ribosomes, are very unstable in all cells. In human thalassaemia, there
Type of abnormality Cause
is an excess of a- and b-globin subunits not in tetramers that are
Incomplete proteins Nonsense mutations, incorporation of puromycin,
premature termination, proteolytic cleavage rapidly degraded within reticulocytes8. However, their destruction is
Missense proteins Mutations, incorporation of amino-acid analogues, not sufficiently rapid to prevent free chains from precipitating and
biosynthetic errors distorting erythrocyte shape. This defect in protein assembly leads
Free subunits of multimeric Excess synthesized subunits eventually to anaemia because these misshapen red cells are rapidly
complexes
destroyed by the spleen (which functions as a quality-control system
Postsynthetic damage Oxygen radicals, intracellular denaturation to ensure that circulating cells have the correct shape)8. The degrada-
Genetic engineering Gene fusions, frame-shifts, incorrect localization tion of free subunits of multimeric enzymes thus not only protects
Protein misfolding cells against accumulation of denatured, potentially toxic polypep-
tides but also functions as a quality-control mechanism that ensures
in E. colior treatment with streptomycin, each of which causes trans- that subunits of multimeric complexes are present in the proper
lational errors and the production of error-laden proteins, leads to an stoichiometry.
overall increase in proteolysis4,11. In fact, because of this rapid degra-
dation, the actual error rate in gene expression in vivois impossible to Postsynthetic damage to cell proteins
determine with precision. For a protein, the cell can hardly be a hospitable environment, espe-
Incomplete proteins, such as can arise through mistakes in RNA cially in warm-blooded species. Within cells, proteins are constantly
splicing, the incorporation of puromycin2,4,6or nonsense mutations, exposed to highly reactive molecules and to conditions tha

Chunk 6:
ble to Postsynthetic damage to cell proteins
determine with precision. For a protein, the cell can hardly be a hospitable environment, espe-
Incomplete proteins, such as can arise through mistakes in RNA cially in warm-blooded species. Within cells, proteins are constantly
splicing, the incorporation of puromycin2,4,6or nonsense mutations, exposed to highly reactive molecules and to conditions that favour
are rapidly degraded in all cells. Such fragments fail to assume their denaturation (see Box 1) and are under constant surveillance by the
proper conformation. Bacteria also have a specialized mechanism to proteolytic systems, which continually monitor mature proteins for
target for destruction incomplete polypeptides while they are still on postsynthetic denaturation or chemical damage. Consequently, a
stalled ribosomes11, but no similar mechanism has yet been found in protein’s life within the cell is likely to be ‘nasty, brutish and short’.
eukaryotes. To maintain the activity of most proteins in the laboratory, it is
The quality-control systems in bacteria and eukaryotic cells do essential to store them at low temperatures in pure solutions or
not degrade all, or even most, mutated proteins: only those muta- even freeze-dry them. A competent biochemist would never store
tions that markedly perturb protein folding trigger rapid hydrolysis his favourite protein at 37 °C in a highly reactive environment such
(such as mutations of key residues or large deletions) (see Table 1). as the intracellular milieu, where reactive oxygen species (for exam-
For example, only about one-fifth of the hundreds of human haemo- ple hydroxyl radicals) are continually being generated that can
globin point mutations generate proteins that undergo rapid degra- destroy amino acids in proteins17,18. It is also an environment where
dation (as suggested by the low levels of the abnormal protein in reactive sugars abound that can glycate proteins, where many
mature red cells)8. A major rece

Chunk 7:
e-fifth of the hundreds of human haemo- ple hydroxyl radicals) are continually being generated that can
globin point mutations generate proteins that undergo rapid degra- destroy amino acids in proteins17,18. It is also an environment where
dation (as suggested by the low levels of the abnormal protein in reactive sugars abound that can glycate proteins, where many
mature red cells)8. A major recent development has been the discov- enzymes are found that modify or destroy proteins (for example
ery that many abnormally folded proteins in the secretory pathway proteases), and where there are fatty acids that can function as
(for example, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regula- detergents, and partially folded nascent chains that act as nuclei for
tor) are translocated back into the cytosol, where they undergo rapid aggregation. These protein-modifying processes must continually
degradation (see the article by Sitia and Braakman in this issue p. 891, cause stochastic damage to well-formed cellular proteins, trigger-
and ref. 10). ing their degradation2. Even in pure solutions, multiple changes in
primary sequence (deamidation of glutamines, and residue iso-
Degradation of newly synthesized proteins merization) occur over time (termed ‘protein ageing’), leading to
The folding of newly synthesized proteins to their proper confor- rapid degradation by proteasomes19. Although it generally func-
mations involves the sequential actions of multiple molecular tions as part of the ubiquitin–proteasome pathway, the 26S protea-
chaperones13,14, and this process can take many minutes or even some has the capacity to degrade certain unfolded or damaged pro-
longer, and may often be unsuccessful. A large fraction of newly teins, including ‘aged’ or denatured proteins, without initial mark-
synthesized proteins is rapidly degraded2,15,16. As many as 30% of ing them by ubiquitylation. The frequency of such modifications
newly synthesized proteins in eukaryotes might unde

Chunk 8:
y minutes or even some has the capacity to degrade certain unfolded or damaged pro-
longer, and may often be unsuccessful. A large fraction of newly teins, including ‘aged’ or denatured proteins, without initial mark-
synthesized proteins is rapidly degraded2,15,16. As many as 30% of ing them by ubiquitylation. The frequency of such modifications
newly synthesized proteins in eukaryotes might undergo degrada- and denaturing events must be high, because the free energy for
tion within minutes of synthesis15. Although initially attributed to stabilizing proteins is not great. Furthermore, in certain environ-
mistakes in ribosomal function (and named DRIPS, for ‘defective ments, the frequency of damage to cell proteins increases — for
ribosomal products’), it seems more likely that a large fraction of example after heat shock, in which many proteins are unfolded3, or
these short-lived species are products of unsuccessful folding or during oxidative stress or inflammation, when oxygen radicals are
failures of multimer assembly. However, the actual fraction of generated in increased amounts17.
short-lived species that are genuinely aberrant proteins is contro-
versial and extremely difficult to determine rigorously for multiple Box 1
reasons. For example, a number of important regulatory proteins Intracellular conditions that damage cell proteins
have very short half-lives (as short as 2–20 min)1; also fragments of
all secretory and membrane proteins (signal peptides) are degrad- Temperature of 37 °C or higher (denaturing conditions).
ed as part of the secretory process. Nevertheless, it seems likely that Many reactive small molecules — these cause oxidation,
many newly synthesized polypeptides are destroyed because of the deamidation, glycation or nitrosylation.
inherent inefficiency of protein folding15 and that, after release Many enzymes that modify proteins, for example proteases
from the ribosome, polypeptides face a life–death kinetic competi- or kinases.
tion bet

Chunk 9:
eless, it seems likely that Many reactive small molecules — these cause oxidation,
many newly synthesized polypeptides are destroyed because of the deamidation, glycation or nitrosylation.
inherent inefficiency of protein folding15 and that, after release Many enzymes that modify proteins, for example proteases
from the ribosome, polypeptides face a life–death kinetic competi- or kinases.
tion between successful folding and rapid hydrolysis of unfolded High salt concentrations (which favour dissociation of multimers)
species. Many fatty acids, which act like detergents.
Particularly critical steps in the folding process are the binding of Other unfolded proteins — nascent polypeptides, damaged or
cofactors and the association of different subunits to form multimer- mutant polypeptides and insoluble inclusions are sticky.
ic complexes13,14. In the absence of cofactors or complementary sub-
units, free subunits generally fail to achieve native conformations and Conclusion: to maintain a protein’s function, avoid the intracellularmilieu.
have exposed hydrophobic surfaces. Such free subunits tend to be
896 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
Hsp40
Native protein Misfolded
Hsp70 Ubiquitin ATP
Denaturation Hsp70 conjugation
Damage Hsp40 20S
Chip
(E3) E2 19S
Folded 26S proteasome
Misfolded
E1 + + ATP
Peptides
Ribosome
RNA Amino acids
DNA
Figure 1 The ubiquitin–proteasome pathway. Molecular chaperones may function in synthesized proteins and favours their refolding. Alternatively, they can facilitate the
protein folding and in the degradation of misfolded species. By associating with recognition of abnormal proteins, leading to their ubiquitylation by CHIP, the E3, and
exposed hydrophobic domains, chaperones Hsp70/40 promote the folding of newly their degradation by the 26S proteasome. The red circles represent ubiquitin.
Although many proteins are short-lived, the bulk of cell prot

Chunk 10:
facilitate the
protein folding and in the degradation of misfolded species. By associating with recognition of abnormal proteins, leading to their ubiquitylation by CHIP, the E3, and
exposed hydrophobic domains, chaperones Hsp70/40 promote the folding of newly their degradation by the 26S proteasome. The red circles represent ubiquitin.
Although many proteins are short-lived, the bulk of cell proteins The ubiquitin–proteasome pathway
are ‘long-lived’, and 1–2% of them are degraded per hour in mam- A fundamental feature of protein degradation in all cells, and even
mals16. Even though these rates are physiologically regulated, the mitochondria, is that it requires metabolic energy. This requirement
degradation of these long-lived proteins follows exponential decay for ATP is unexpected on thermodynamic grounds. Consequently, it
kinetics, suggesting that a stochastic event triggers their destruction. was initially viewed as evidence for an ATP requirement for the func-
Thus, for many — and perhaps most — proteins, a random event, tion of lysosomes, then believed to be the only site of protein break-
spontaneous denaturation or chemical modification leading to down in cells. However, the selective degradation of abnormal
unfolding might be the critical event triggering degradation2. proteins also requires ATP in cells that lack lysosomes (for example,
bacteria)4,6. This insight led to the development of cell-free prepara-
Abnormal proteins may aggregate before degradation tions that catalyse the ATP-dependent degradation of abnormal pro-
A characteristic feature of denatured proteins is that they aggregate teins6. Attempts to understand this mysterious role for ATP led to the
and leave solution (because of the tendency of normally buried discovery of the involvement of ubiquitin conjugation in marking
hydrophobic domains to associate with one another). Similarly, proteins for degradation24and of the 26S proteasome25,26. In eukary-
when the production of misfolded prote

Chunk 11:
roteins is that they aggregate teins6. Attempts to understand this mysterious role for ATP led to the
and leave solution (because of the tendency of normally buried discovery of the involvement of ubiquitin conjugation in marking
hydrophobic domains to associate with one another). Similarly, proteins for degradation24and of the 26S proteasome25,26. In eukary-
when the production of misfolded proteins exceeds the cell’s otes, ATP is initially essential to activate ubiquitin, which is then
degradative capacity, these polypeptides often form intracellular transferred to one of the cell’s 20–40 different ubiquitin-carrier pro-
aggregates before their rapid degradation3,7,20. Indeed, the finding teins (E2s). The exquisite selectivity of this pathway resides in the
that many cloned, misfolded proteins also aggregate in the cytosol ubiquitin ligases, or E3s, which are specific for different protein sub-
of bacteria has sometimes proved to be of major benefit to strates1. Mammalian cells contain hundreds of different ubiquitin
researchers, allowing the rapid isolation of the foreign ligases, which, together with a specific E2, catalyse the formation of
polypeptides. The formation of such inclusions occurs when the the ubiquitin chain on a limited number of protein substrates, trig-
cell’s proteolytic systems and molecular chaperones, which gering their rapid degradation by the 26S proteasome27(see below
normally prevent aggregation (for example Hsp70/40)13,14 or and Fig. 1).
resolubilize microaggregates (Hsp104)21, cannot keep up with the Which E2s and E3s are involved in this cellular quality-control
rate of production of unfolded molecules. system and how they recognize misfolded proteins are still open
Similar inclusions are found in various inherited and neurode- questions. Several E3s are essential for the degradation of abnormal
generative diseases, in which these inclusions are ubiquitylated and proteins in the secretory pathway (see the progress in this issue by
ass

Chunk 12:
ular quality-control
rate of production of unfolded molecules. system and how they recognize misfolded proteins are still open
Similar inclusions are found in various inherited and neurode- questions. Several E3s are essential for the degradation of abnormal
generative diseases, in which these inclusions are ubiquitylated and proteins in the secretory pathway (see the progress in this issue by
associated with proteasomes3 (see also the article in this issue by Sitia and Braakman p. 891, and ref. 10), and certain E2s (Ubc4 and
Selkoe, p. 891 ), strongly suggesting a failure of the cell’s degradative Ubc5) are necessary for the rapid degradation of cytosolic abnormal
machinery3. When mammalian cells are treated with proteasome proteins and are induced as part of the heat-shock response11. This
inhibitors, such inclusions appear rapidly, thus indicating that many transcriptional response is triggered in all cells by the appearance of
substrates of the proteasome in normal cells are misfolded proteins3. unfolded proteins (for example, after exposure to increased tempera-
As abnormal proteins accumulate, larger inclusions are found near tures or ‘oxidants’) and leads to an enhanced cellular content of chap-
the centrosome as a result of an active microtubule-dependent erones and increased degradative capacity3,11,28.
process that isolates the unfolded proteins in amorphous structures, Recently, one E3, CHIP (for carboxy terminus of Hsp70-interact-
which are often termed ‘aggresomes’22. If the production of such ing protein)29,30, has been identified in mammals that seems to ubiq-
abnormal proteins ceases and degradation is allowed to proceed, all uitylate certain mutant proteins selectively in a process requiring the
cells, from bacteria20to neurons23, can eliminate the proteinaceous molecular chaperones Hsp70 or Hsp90,which bind to unfolded or
inclusions. The mechanisms in mammalian cells for solubilizing and hydrophobic domains13,14and seem to facilitate substrate reco

Chunk 13:
-
abnormal proteins ceases and degradation is allowed to proceed, all uitylate certain mutant proteins selectively in a process requiring the
cells, from bacteria20to neurons23, can eliminate the proteinaceous molecular chaperones Hsp70 or Hsp90,which bind to unfolded or
inclusions. The mechanisms in mammalian cells for solubilizing and hydrophobic domains13,14and seem to facilitate substrate recogni-
digesting these proteins are unknown, and further understanding of tion by CHIP29,30. These chaperones are normally among the most
this process could have therapeutic applications for various protein- abundant cell proteins, and their levels rise further in harsh condi-
folding diseases. tions that damage cell proteins3,11,28. By binding to unfolded domains
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 897

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
of nascent proteins, they prevent their aggregation and facilitate nor- in recent years27. The 26S proteasome is composed of a core 20S parti-
mal folding in stressed cells, and promote the refolding of denatured cle, in which proteins are digested to short peptides, and one or two
molecules13,14. The discovery that these chaperones also have a func- 19S regulatory particles, responsible for substrate recognition and
tion in the selective degradation of abnormal proteins has important transport into the core particle27. The 20S particle is composed of
implications.Chaperone involvement in proteolysis, as well as folding, four stacked rings, whose subunits surround a central cavity. Its two
would provide an efficient quality-control mechanism, because inner b-rings form a central chamber containing the proteolytic
unsuccessful folding would mean prolonged association of the sub- sites, which face the central cavity. This organization ensures that
strate with the chaperones, leading to rapid degradation29–32. However, protein digestion is isolated from the surrounding cytosol. Eukaryot-

Chunk 14:
uld provide an efficient quality-control mechanism, because inner b-rings form a central chamber containing the proteolytic
unsuccessful folding would mean prolonged association of the sub- sites, which face the central cavity. This organization ensures that
strate with the chaperones, leading to rapid degradation29–32. However, protein digestion is isolated from the surrounding cytosol. Eukaryot-
it remains unclear whether CHIP catalyses the ubiquitylation of ic proteasomes contain two sites that cleave after hydrophobic
abnormal proteins generally or whether many E3s function in the residues, two after acidic residues and two after basic residues; thus
degradation of different types of aberrant protein. It is also unclear they can cut most types of peptide bond5,27. Substrates can enter the
whether ubiquitylation is essential for the proteasomal elimination of 20S particle only through a gated channel in the centre of the a-ring39,
all abnormal proteins in vivo, because this process occurs efficientlyin which is normally maintained in a closed state, and access is con-
bacteria and archaea, which lack ubiquitin. In addition, in vitro trolled by the associated ATPases in the 19S particle40.
eukaryotic 26S proteasomes degrade many unfolded proteins (for The entry channel is quite narrow, and even in its open state it
example, ‘aged’ calmodulin) without ubiquitin conjugation19. allows entry of only unfolded proteins39,40. While excluding normal
globular proteins, this architecture requires complex ATP-depen-
ATP-dependent proteolytic machines dent mechanisms to recognize, unfold and linearize substrates and to
A very different and more general explanation of the requirement of inject them into the 20S proteasome40. It is still unclear where in the
ATP for the degradation of abnormal proteins emerged from our 19S is located the initial binding site for ubiquitin chain and the enzy-
studies of this process in E. coliand mitochondria33. Large proteolytic matic machinery

Chunk 15:
fold and linearize substrates and to
A very different and more general explanation of the requirement of inject them into the 20S proteasome40. It is still unclear where in the
ATP for the degradation of abnormal proteins emerged from our 19S is located the initial binding site for ubiquitin chain and the enzy-
studies of this process in E. coliand mitochondria33. Large proteolytic matic machinery for disassembling these chains1,27. The base of the
complexes were discovered whose activity was coupled to ATP 19S contains a ring of six ATPases that provide added selectivity and
hydrolysis33–35. For example, the Lon (La) protease is a 600 kDa somehow unfold proteins, translocate them and trigger gate-open-
ATPase complex that rapidly degrades most abnormal proteins in ing into the 20S particle40. This elegant mechanism uses the energy in
E. coli33–35. The Lon homologue in mitochondria is necessary for the a considerable number of ATP molecules in degrading a protein, per-
viability of eukaryotes, presumably because it helps to prevent the haps one-third of the ATP used by the ribosome in their synthesis40.
build-up of aberrant proteins within this organelle36,37. In addition, The essential features of this process emerged early in evolution; the
bacteria and mitochondria contain several other proteolytic com- proteasomes of Archaea function together with a very similar ATPase
plexes (namely ClpAP, ClpXP, HslUV and FtsH)5,33–36 that are ring (termed PAN) that selects, unfolds and translocates sub-
composed of distinct ATPase and proteolytic subcomplexes. Like the strates5,40. With the emergence of eukaryotes, this process became
proteasome, these enzymes are large complexes (at least 20–30-fold linked to ubiquitin conjugation, which, like the architecture of the
larger than typical proteases) that processively degrade proteins to proteasome and its linkage to ATP hydrolysis, should be viewed as
oligopeptides. In each case, ATP hydrolysis appears necessary for the mechan

Chunk 16:
ith the emergence of eukaryotes, this process became
proteasome, these enzymes are large complexes (at least 20–30-fold linked to ubiquitin conjugation, which, like the architecture of the
larger than typical proteases) that processively degrade proteins to proteasome and its linkage to ATP hydrolysis, should be viewed as
oligopeptides. In each case, ATP hydrolysis appears necessary for the mechanisms to ensure that only unwanted proteins are selectively
unfolding of substrates and for their delivery into a proteolytic sub- degraded.
compartment, where the substrates are digested, thus avoiding the
non-specific destruction of other cell constituents. These proteases Key questions and future prospects
are all heat-shock proteins3,5,10,33, which means that they are coordi- The selective degradation of abnormal proteins has been known for
nately induced together with molecular chaperones whenever cells about 30 years, but many fundamental questions remain unan-
generate large amounts of unfolded proteins (Table 1)3,10,28. For swered. Although many adverse events during gene expression and
example, they are often induced in bacteria that express cloned protein folding, and many untoward postsynthetic events, trigger
foreign proteins11. degradation, it is unclear to what extent this quality-control process
In all cells and mitochondria, these proteases function together contributes to overall protein turnover in normal cells. In addition,
with molecular chaperones in protein degradation3; for example, the the mechanisms by which various types of misfolded polypeptides
rapid hydrolysis of certain abnormal proteins in E. colirequires the are recognized remain a mystery that has received only limited study.
homologues of chaperones Hsp70/40 (ref. 32), whereas the degrada- One important clue is that their degradation in all cells requires mol-
tion of others requires GroEL/ES chaperonins (also called Hsp60/10) ecular chaperones, which probably function in substrate
(ref. 38)

Chunk 17:
olysis of certain abnormal proteins in E. colirequires the are recognized remain a mystery that has received only limited study.
homologues of chaperones Hsp70/40 (ref. 32), whereas the degrada- One important clue is that their degradation in all cells requires mol-
tion of others requires GroEL/ES chaperonins (also called Hsp60/10) ecular chaperones, which probably function in substrate
(ref. 38). These large particles create an isolation chamber within recognition3,30,32 but perhaps also in maintaining substrates in a
which proteins can fold13,14, yet they also seem to facilitate the prote- soluble, easily digestible state31,38.
olytic digestion of proteins that are hard to degrade38. This lack of mechanistic understanding is surprising and regret-
How the cell’s two major defence systems, molecular chaperones table, because this process is of fundamental biological importance.
and proteasomes, function together in the elimination of abnormal The genetic deletion of virtually any subunit of the 26S proteasome in
proteins is not clear. Prolonged chaperone binding can help in the yeast prevents viability27, and various point mutations leave the cells
identification of proteins with unfolded domains30,32, but the chaper- viable but very sensitive to conditions that increase the production of
ones might also function as cofactors in maintaining the substrate in abnormal proteins (such as heat shock)27. When unfolded proteins
a soluble, unfolded state that facilitates proteolytic attack31,38. An build up and exceed the cell’s degradative capacity (for example, in
attractive (‘triage’) model is that a failure of the chaperones to per- the presence of proteasome inhibitors), cells activate the heat-shock
form protein folding or the refolding of damaged proteins leads to the response41,42and induce the synthesis of more proteasomes43. The
recruitment of proteases or ubiquitylation enzymes to eliminate the continued accumulation of such proteins eventually triggers the act

Chunk 18:
triage’) model is that a failure of the chaperones to per- the presence of proteasome inhibitors), cells activate the heat-shock
form protein folding or the refolding of damaged proteins leads to the response41,42and induce the synthesis of more proteasomes43. The
recruitment of proteases or ubiquitylation enzymes to eliminate the continued accumulation of such proteins eventually triggers the acti-
potentially dangerous polypeptides3,30–32. vation of Jnk kinases and apoptosis3,44. It is now well established that
damage to cell proteins (just like damage to DNA or chromosomal
The 26S proteasome organization) can activate the cell-death programme. However, the
Whereas proteolysis in bacteria and mitochondria involves several ability of unfolded proteins to activate apoptosis has received little
specialized ATP-hydrolysing proteases, eukaryotic cells in their attention, yet it probably has an important function in diseases where
cytosol and nucleus contain only one such enzyme of enormous size unfolded proteins accumulate and are associated with neurodegen-
(namely 50 subunits totalling 2.4 MDa) that degrades various types eration. Importantly, certain cancers, especially multiple myeloma,
of substrate fed to it by multiple ubiquitin ligases. Understanding of are particularly sensitive to apoptosis induced by proteasome
the functioning of this proteolytic complex has advanced markedly inhibitors, and one such inhibitor (Velcade) has recently been
898 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight review articles
approved for treatment of myeloma42,45. These cancer cells generate calmodulin damaged by in vitroaging are selectively degraded by 26S proteasomes without
ubiquitylation. J. Biol. Chem. 275,20295–20301 (2000).
very large amounts of abnormal immunoglobins and consequently
20.Prouty, W. F. & Goldberg, A. L. Fate of abnormal proteins in E. coli: accumulation in intracellular
are probably the cells

Chunk 19:
s
approved for treatment of myeloma42,45. These cancer cells generate calmodulin damaged by in vitroaging are selectively degraded by 26S proteasomes without
ubiquitylation. J. Biol. Chem. 275,20295–20301 (2000).
very large amounts of abnormal immunoglobins and consequently
20.Prouty, W. F. & Goldberg, A. L. Fate of abnormal proteins in E. coli: accumulation in intracellular
are probably the cells that are most dependent on proteasome func- granules before catabolism. Nature New Biol. 240,147–150 (1972).
tion for the continual elimination of abnormal proteins. 21.Glover, J. R. & Lindquist, S. Hsp104, Hsp70, and Hsp40: A novel chaperone system that rescues
Evolution has provided multiple levels of protection against previously aggregated proteins. Cell94,73–82 (1998).
22.Johnston, J. A., Ward, C. L. & Kopito, R. R. Aggresomes: a cellular response to misfolded proteins.
abnormal proteins — from proteasomes and chaperones to induc-
J.CellBiol.1998. 143,1883–1898.
tion of the heat-shock genes and apoptosis. To what extent these 23.Yamamoto, A., Lucas, J. J. & Hen, R. Reversal of neuropathology and motor dysfunction in a
mechanisms protect us against various human diseases is still uncer- conditional model of Huntington’s disease. Cell101,57–66 (2000).
24.Ciechanover, A., Heller, H., Elias, S., Haas, A. L. & Hershko A. ATP-dependent conjugation of
tain. It is clear that in many diseases these proteolytic systems fail to
reticulocyte proteins with the polypeptide required for protein degradation. Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.USA
prevent the accumulation of the damaging proteins, perhaps because 77,1365–1368 (1980).
of defects in this degradative machinery. Greater understanding of 25.Hough, R., Pratt, G. & Rechsteiner, M. Purification of two high molecular weight proteases from
this quality-control process is therefore not only of scientific interest rabbit reticulocyte lysate. J.Biol.Chem. 262,8303–8313 (1987).
but might lead to new therapies. nn 26.Waxman, L., Fagan, J. M. & Goldb

Chunk 20:
ause 77,1365–1368 (1980).
of defects in this degradative machinery. Greater understanding of 25.Hough, R., Pratt, G. & Rechsteiner, M. Purification of two high molecular weight proteases from
this quality-control process is therefore not only of scientific interest rabbit reticulocyte lysate. J.Biol.Chem. 262,8303–8313 (1987).
but might lead to new therapies. nn 26.Waxman, L., Fagan, J. M. & Goldberg, A. L. Demonstration of two distinct high molecular weight
proteases in rabbit reticulocytes, one of which degrades ubiquitin conjugates. J.Biol.Chem.262,
2451–2457 (1987).
doi:10.1038/nature02263 27.Voges, D., Zwickl, P., Baumeister, W. The 26S proteasome: a molecular machine designed for
controlled proteolysis. Annu.Rev.Biochem.68,1015–1068 (2000).
1. Glickman, M. H. & Ciechanover, A. The ubiquitin–proteasome proteolytic pathway: Destruction for
28.Ananthan, J., Goldberg, A. L. & Voellmy, R. Abnormal proteins serve as eukaryotic stress signals and
the sake of construction. Physiol. Rev.82,373–428 (2002).
trigger the activation of heat-shock genes. Science232,522–524 (1986).
2. Goldberg, A. L. & Dice, J. F. Intracellular protein degradation in mammalian and bacterial cells. 29.Meacham, G. C., Patterson, C., Zhang, W., Younger, J. M. & Cyr, D. M. The Hsc70 co-chaperone
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 43,835–869 (1974). CHIP targets immature CFTR for proteasomal degradation. NatureCellBiol. 3,100–105 (2001).
3. Sherman, M. & Goldberg, A. L. Cellular defenses against unfolded proteins: a cell biologist thinks 30.Murata, S., Minami, Y., Minami, M., Chiba, T. & Tanaka, K. CHIP is a chaperone-dependent E3 ligase
about neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron29,15–32 (2001). that ubiquitylates unfolded protein. EMBORep.2,1133–1138. (2001).
4. Goldberg, A. L. Degradation of abnormal proteins in E. coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA69,422–426 31.Wickner, S., Maurizi, M. & Gottesman, S. Posttranslational quality control: folding, refolding, and
(1972). degrading proteins. Science286,1888–1893 (1999)

Chunk 21:
ependent E3 ligase
about neurodegenerative diseases. Neuron29,15–32 (2001). that ubiquitylates unfolded protein. EMBORep.2,1133–1138. (2001).
4. Goldberg, A. L. Degradation of abnormal proteins in E. coli. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA69,422–426 31.Wickner, S., Maurizi, M. & Gottesman, S. Posttranslational quality control: folding, refolding, and
(1972). degrading proteins. Science286,1888–1893 (1999).
5. Zwickl, P., Goldberg, A. L. & Baumeister, W. in Proteasomes: The World of Regulatory Proteolysis(eds 32.Huang, H.C., Sherman, M. Y., Kandror, O. & Goldberg, A. L. The molecular chaperone DnaJ is required
Wolf, D. H. & Hilt, W.) 8–20 (Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, Texas, 2000). for the degradation of a soluble abnormal protein in E. coli. J.Biol.Chem.276,3920–3928 (2001).
6. Etlinger, J. & Goldberg, A. L. A soluble, ATP-dependent proteolytic system responsible for the 33.Goldberg, A. L. The mechanisms and functions of ATP-dependent proteases in bacterial and animal
degradation of abnormal proteins in reticulocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 74,54–58 (1977). cells. Eur.J.Biochem.203,9–23 (1992).
7. Klemes, Y., Etlinger, J. D. & Goldberg, A. L. Properties of proteins degraded rapidly in reticulocytes: 34.Chung, C. H. Proteases in Escherichiacoli. Science262,372–374 (1993).
intracellular aggregation of the globin molecules prior to hydrolysis. J. Biol. Chem.256,8436–8444 35.Maurizi, M. R. Proteases and protein degradation in Escherichiacoli. Experientia48,178–201 (1992).
(1981). 36.Langer, T., Kaser, M., Klanner, C., Leonhard, K. AAA proteases of mitochondria: quality control of
8. Bunn, H. F. et al.Hemoglobin: Molecular, Genetic, and Clinical Aspects(Saunders, Philadelphia, 1986). membrane proteins and regulatory functions during mitochondrial biogenesis. Biochem.Soc.Trans.
9. Goldberg, A. L. & Goff, S. A. in Maximizing Gene ExpressionCh. 9 (eds Reznikoff, W. & Gold, L.) 29,431–436 (2001).
287–314 (Butterworths, Stoneham, Massachusetts, 1986). 37.Suzuki, C. K., Rep, M.,

Chunk 22:

8. Bunn, H. F. et al.Hemoglobin: Molecular, Genetic, and Clinical Aspects(Saunders, Philadelphia, 1986). membrane proteins and regulatory functions during mitochondrial biogenesis. Biochem.Soc.Trans.
9. Goldberg, A. L. & Goff, S. A. in Maximizing Gene ExpressionCh. 9 (eds Reznikoff, W. & Gold, L.) 29,431–436 (2001).
287–314 (Butterworths, Stoneham, Massachusetts, 1986). 37.Suzuki, C. K., Rep, M., van Dijl, J. M., Suda, K., Grivell, L. A., Schatz, G. ATP-dependent proteases
10.Kostova, Z. & Wolf, D. H. For whom the bell tolls: protein quality control of the endoplasmic that also chaperone protein biogenesis. TrendsBiochem.Sci.22,118–123 (1997).
reticulum and the ubiquitin–proteasome connection. EMBO J.22,2309–2317 (2003). 38.Kandror, O., Sherman, M. Y. & Goldberg, A. L. Rapid degradation of an abnormal protein in E.coli
11.Goff, S. A., Voellmy, R. & Goldberg, A. L. in UbiquitinCh. 8 (ed. Rechsteiner, M.) 207–238 (Plenum, proceeds through repeated cycles of association with GroEL. J.Biol.Chem.274,37743–37749 (1999).
New York, 1988). 39.Groll, M. et al. A gated channel into the proteasome core particle. NatureStruct.Biol.7,1062–1067
12.Roche, E. & Sauer, R. T. SsrA-mediated peptide tagging caused by rare codons and tRNA scarcity. (2000).
EMBO J.18,4579–4589 (1999). 40.Benaroudj, N., Zwickl, P., Seemüller, E., Baumeister, W. & Goldberg, A. L. ATP hydrolysis by the
13.Frydman, J. Folding of newly translated proteins in vivo: the role of molecular chaperones. Annu. Rev. proteasome regulatory complex PAN serves multiple functions in protein degradation. Mol.Cell11,
Biochem. 70,603–647 (2001). 69–78 (2003).
14.Hartl, F. U. & Mayer-Hartl, M. Molecular chaperones in the cytosol: from nascent chain to folded 41.Lee, D. H. & Goldberg, A. L. Proteasome inhibitors cause rapid induction of heat-shock proteins and
protein. Science295,1852–1858 (2002). trehalose, which together confer thermotolerance in Saccharomycescerevisiae. Mol.Cell.Biol.18,
15.Schubert, U. et al.Rapid degradat

Chunk 23:
3–647 (2001). 69–78 (2003).
14.Hartl, F. U. & Mayer-Hartl, M. Molecular chaperones in the cytosol: from nascent chain to folded 41.Lee, D. H. & Goldberg, A. L. Proteasome inhibitors cause rapid induction of heat-shock proteins and
protein. Science295,1852–1858 (2002). trehalose, which together confer thermotolerance in Saccharomycescerevisiae. Mol.Cell.Biol.18,
15.Schubert, U. et al.Rapid degradation of a large fraction of newly synthesized proteins by proteasomes. 30–38 (1998).
Nature 44,770–774 (2000). 42.Kisselev, A. F. & Goldberg, A. L. Proteasome inhibitors: from research tools to drug candidates.
16.Gronostajski, R., Pardee, A. B. & Goldberg, A. L. The ATP-dependence of the degradation of short- ChemyBiol.8,739–758 (2001).
and long-lived proteins in growing fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem.260,3344–3349 (1985). 43.Meiners, S. etal.Inhibition of proteasome activity induces concerted expression of proteasome genes
17.Berlett, B. S. & Stadtman, E. R. Protein oxidation in aging, disease, and oxidative stress. J. Biol. Chem. and denovoformation of mammalian proteasomes. J.Biol.Chem. 278,21517–21525 (2003).
272,20313–20316 (1997). 44.Meriin, A. B. etal.Protein-damaging stresses activate c-Jun N-terminal kinase via inhibition of its
18.Grune, T., Reinheckel, T., Davies, K. J. Degradation of oxidized proteins in mammalian cells. FASEB J. dephosphorylation: a novel pathway controlled by HSP72. Mol. Cell. Biol.19,2547–2555 (1999).
11,536–534 (1997). 45. Hideshima, T. et al. The proteasome inhibitor pS-341 inhibits growth, induces apoptosis, and
19.Tarcsa, E., Szymanska, G., Lecker, S., O’Connor, C. M. & Goldberg, A. L. Ca2+-free calmodulin and overcomes drug resistance in human multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res.61,3071–3076 (2001).
NATURE|VOL426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 899

---PAGE BREAK---



Chunk 24:
., O’Connor, C. M. & Goldberg, A. L. Ca2+-free calmodulin and overcomes drug resistance in human multiple myeloma cells. Cancer Res.61,3071–3076 (2001).
NATURE|VOL426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 899

---PAGE BREAK---



