Chunk 1:
insight progress
Quality control in the endoplasmic
reticulum protein factory
Roberto Sitia1& Ineke Braakman2
1Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milano, Italy (e-mail: r.sitia@hsr.it)
2Bio-Organic Chemistry 1, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands (e-mail: i.braakman@chem.uu.nl)
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a factory where secretory proteins are manufactured, and where stringent
quality-control systems ensure that only correctly folded proteins are sent to their final destinations. The
changing needs of the ER factory are monitored by integrated signalling pathways that constantly adjust the
levels of folding assistants. ER chaperones and signalling molecules are emerging as drug targets in
amyloidoses and other protein-conformational diseases.
A
berrant proteins are extremely harmful to cells. ER (Fig. 1), where they start to fold co-translationally.
Such proteins can originate from mutations, Folding is completed post-translationally, and, generally,
unbalanced subunit synthesis, damaging con- individual subunits have folded before assembly and
ditions (for example, oxidation) and also as a oligomerization take place1. Sequential interactions with
side product of normal protein biosynthesis. A distinct chaperones are required for each of these steps.
certain degree of folding inefficiency can be useful. Misfold- For instance, MHC class I molecules exploit calnexin,
ed proteins are degraded into fragments (peptides), which calreticulin and other devoted ER-resident molecules (for
are then displayed on the cell’s surface. In cells that are not example, tapasin) to negotiate their stepwise assembly into
infected, normal cytosolic and nuclear proteins will be dis- peptide-loaded functional complexes3. Although most
played; in cells that are infected with a virus, viral peptides folding factors in the ER are ubiquitously expressed
are presented and then detected by immune cells. The pres- throughout the body, some are t

Chunk 2:
 cells that are not example, tapasin) to negotiate their stepwise assembly into
infected, normal cytosolic and nuclear proteins will be dis- peptide-loaded functional complexes3. Although most
played; in cells that are infected with a virus, viral peptides folding factors in the ER are ubiquitously expressed
are presented and then detected by immune cells. The pres- throughout the body, some are tissue-type specific or cell-
ence of membrane-bounded compartments in eukaryotic type specific, and probably fulfil a particular synthetic task
cells further complicates the issue of protein homeostasis, as (Table 1). For example, efficient collagen production
it implies the existence and coordination of multiple folding requires the expression of hsp47, whereas a tissue-specific
and degradation systems. protein-disulphide-isomerase-like protein, PDIp, is
A proper balance between synthesis, maturation and produced in the pancreas and probably permits the
degradation is crucial for cell survival. At a time when health massive secretion of digestive enzymes1,4.
threats come from viruses, misfolded proteins (which can
cause Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease) and inherited diseases, Disulphide-bond formation
and when protein-based drugs are being introduced, a full Both N-glycosylation and disulphide-bond formation play
understanding of how cells handle proteins is of crucial a crucial role in the folding of secretory and membrane
importance. proteins in the ER. The glycans add hydrophobicity to the
In eukaryotic cells, the vast majority of proteins fold folding peptide but also act as substrates for the lectin chap-
either in the cytosol or in the ER. Although the general prin- erones calnexin and calreticulin, whose role in glycoprotein
ciples are similar in the both compartments1,2, fundamental folding has been extensively reviewed5,6. Both calnexin and
differences exist. Here we summarize the main features of calreticulin form a complex with ERp57, an ER oxido-
folding and quality 

Chunk 3:
tes for the lectin chap-
either in the cytosol or in the ER. Although the general prin- erones calnexin and calreticulin, whose role in glycoprotein
ciples are similar in the both compartments1,2, fundamental folding has been extensively reviewed5,6. Both calnexin and
differences exist. Here we summarize the main features of calreticulin form a complex with ERp57, an ER oxido-
folding and quality control in the ER, highlighting emerging reductase, coupling folding assistance to disulphide-bond
concepts of how the functions of the ER are integrated with formation.
other cellular compartments and with transcriptional and The impressive number of oxidoreductases in the ER
translational control to prevent proteotoxicity. suggests that catalysis and regulation of disulphide-bond
formation is crucial for folding. Energywise, in most cases,
Protein folding in the ER the contribution of a disulphide bond is hardly more than
The ER lumen is similar to the extracellular space: it has that of a single hydrogen bond, yet, without disulphide
high calcium concentrations and is more oxidizing than the bonds, native conformations are not obtained. Disulphide
cytosol (see refs 1, 2 and references therein), and contains a bonds cannot force a folding protein into a given conforma-
specialized set of chaperones and enzymes (Table 1). The tion: in the sampling of conformations during folding in the
structural maturation of many proteins synthesized in the ER, native and non-native disulphide cross-links are tran-
ER is slow and inefficient1, probably because they require siently formed. Continuous activity of oxidoreductases
several post-translational modifications (for example, probably ensures that these covalent links remain flexible
signal sequence cleavage, N-linked glycosylation, disul- until folding is completed.
phide-bond formation and reshuffling, addition of Secreted proteins enter the ER with reduced cysteines
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors, insertion of mem- and leav

Chunk 4:
uous activity of oxidoreductases
several post-translational modifications (for example, probably ensures that these covalent links remain flexible
signal sequence cleavage, N-linked glycosylation, disul- until folding is completed.
phide-bond formation and reshuffling, addition of Secreted proteins enter the ER with reduced cysteines
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors, insertion of mem- and leave it with oxidized cystines. The requirement for
brane proteins in the lipid bilayer). Coordinating these oxidative equivalents is fulfilled by Ero1 proteins, which
covalent modifications is a challenging task for the folding transfer electrons from protein disulphide isomerase
machinery in the ER. Nevertheless, the ER factory can reach (PDI) to oxygen through a series of specific interchange
levels of extraordinary efficiency in exocrine glands, plasma reactions7,8. Additional electron transport pathways exist,
cells and other ‘professional secretory cells’. and involve proteins such as Erv2p from yeast, although
In mammalian cells, proteins are translocated into the their role under normal conditions remains to be deter-
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.n©at u2re0.0co3m N/naattuurree PublishingGroup 891

---PAGE BREAK---

insight progress
mined7. The redox gradient between the ER and the cytosol seems consequence they are retained in the ER or retrieved from the Golgi
to be important for intercompartmental signalling, particularly in complex1,4. By forming multimolecular complexes11, folding factors
the integrated response to oxidative stress, in which adaptive in the ER may provide matrices that couple retention to folding and
responses emanating from different compartments are coordinat- assembly. Immature proteins may also form aggregates that are
ed9. And redox reactions with opposite electron fluxes must take excluded from vesicles exiting from the ER1,12.
place in the ER to mediate formation, isomerization and reduction All proteins are subjected to a ‘primary

Chunk 5:
y provide matrices that couple retention to folding and
responses emanating from different compartments are coordinat- assembly. Immature proteins may also form aggregates that are
ed9. And redox reactions with opposite electron fluxes must take excluded from vesicles exiting from the ER1,12.
place in the ER to mediate formation, isomerization and reduction All proteins are subjected to a ‘primary’ quality control that
of disulphides8. The wealth of redox assistants allows these fluxes to monitors their architectural design through ubiquitous folding
be separate, and channels electron transport through specific pro- sensors (Table 1). ‘Secondary’ quality-control mechanisms rely
tein–protein interactions. The main role of glutathione in redox instead on cell-specific factors and facilitate export of individual
homeostasis in the ER seems to be that of buffering the oxidative proteins or classes of proteins (for example, tapasin for class I mole-
power of Ero1 (refs 7, 8). Because disulphide bonds are so impor- cules; see also refs 1, 2, 4 and 13 and references therein for addition-
tant for folding, we may conclude from the number of ER-resident al examples). Although some proteins can be rerouted to and
oxidoreductases that secretory proteins need more help, possibly degraded in the endolysosomal compartment (Fig. 2), the ER is the
because they are often larger than cytosolic ones10. Perhaps secreto- main test bench where molecules destined for the extracellular
ry proteins, which are designed to act extracellularly and often must space are scrutinized for their potential toxicity. Interestingly, ER
carry their biological messages over long distances, need more pro- quality control seems to monitor primarily local structures within
tection from denaturing forces outside the cell. This is an issue that protein domains, allowing transport of proteins originating from
glycans are likely to contribute to as well. exon reshuffling or otherwise ‘flexible’ molecules1,4. A 

Chunk 6:
oxicity. Interestingly, ER
carry their biological messages over long distances, need more pro- quality control seems to monitor primarily local structures within
tection from denaturing forces outside the cell. This is an issue that protein domains, allowing transport of proteins originating from
glycans are likely to contribute to as well. exon reshuffling or otherwise ‘flexible’ molecules1,4. A certain
degree of freedom from quality control is essential for the evolution
Quality control in the ER of proteins. However, it comes at a price for multicellular organ-
Besides providing a unique folding environment, the ER has a crucial isms. Indeed, many proteins that cause systemic amyloidosis (see
quality-control role1,2,4. How does it discriminate between native and the review in this issue by Dobson, page 884) can adopt more than
non-native proteins? The answer to this question depends primarily one conformation and can undergo uncontrolled aggregation out-
on ER chaperones. When folding or assembly intermediates expose side of the cells.
hydrophobic surfaces, unpaired cysteines or immature glycans, ER- The reasons for having a quality-control system in the ER are
resident chaperones or oxidoreductases interact with them, and as a easy to understand where protein folding and function are con-
cerned, especially in multicellular organisms where development
relies on the fidelity of protein secretion. Quality control can also
regulate the transport or the activity of certain proteins during dif-
Ribosome ferentiation14or in response to stress or metabolic requirements. A
Cytosol clear case in the context of ER physiology is that of the transcrip-
tion factor ATF6, a transmembrane protein localized in the ER by
interactions between its luminal domain and BiP, an abundant ER-
from resident chaperone of the hsp70 family (Table 1). The unfolded
ERGIC–Golgi
to proteins titrate BiP, releasing ATF6 for transport and subsequent
cleavage by Golgi proteases15–17. In this way, t

Chunk 7:
sol clear case in the context of ER physiology is that of the transcrip-
tion factor ATF6, a transmembrane protein localized in the ER by
interactions between its luminal domain and BiP, an abundant ER-
from resident chaperone of the hsp70 family (Table 1). The unfolded
ERGIC–Golgi
to proteins titrate BiP, releasing ATF6 for transport and subsequent
cleavage by Golgi proteases15–17. In this way, the active cytosolic
domain is unleashed and delivered to the nucleus, where it drives
Terminally Intermediates Folded
misfolded transcription of target genes. A similar cleavage mechanism to that
for ATF6 underlies the cholesterol-dependent transport of sterol
ERAD regulatory element binding protein18. Other cases of regulated
transport are based on the availability of specific ligands (for
ER Aggregates example, lipids and retinol) or cofactors (calcium ions, vitamin C
and so on). Clarifying the mechanisms controlling differential ER
to Golgi transport has obvious technological and clinical implica-
Sec61 complex tions. For example, ligand-induced transport may allow storage of
Folding factors hormones or other proteins in the ER, which can be released when
necessary by ligand administration19.
Escorts and guides
ERAD factors ER-associated degradation
COPII COPI Mutations or unbalanced subunit synthesis make folding or assembly
— and hence exit from the ER — impossible. To maintain home-
ostasis, terminally misfolded molecules are ‘retrotranslocated’ or
Figure 1Folding in the crowded environment of the ER. The port of entry for proteins ‘dislocated’ across the ER membrane to be degraded by cytosolic
destined for the secretory pathway is the ER. These proteins are synthesized by ER- proteasomes20,21. Dislocation is generally believed to occur through
associated ribosomes and co-translationally translocated across the membrane Sec61, a protein complex also used by nascent proteins to enter into
through the Sec61 complex. The ER is rich in chaperones and folding enzymes the E

Chunk 8:
graded by cytosolic
destined for the secretory pathway is the ER. These proteins are synthesized by ER- proteasomes20,21. Dislocation is generally believed to occur through
associated ribosomes and co-translationally translocated across the membrane Sec61, a protein complex also used by nascent proteins to enter into
through the Sec61 complex. The ER is rich in chaperones and folding enzymes the ER (Fig. 1), raising the question of how vectorial transport in
(folding factors), in molecules involved in mediating transport to the cytosol for opposite directions is regulated. Additional mechanisms for deliver-
proteasomal degradation (ERAD factors) or to the downstream stations of the ing molecules across the ER membrane may also exist.
secretory pathway (escort and guides13). Some ER-resident proteins seem to form A fascinating problem is how molecules that have not been given
multimolecular complexes1, which can be excluded from transport by size selection, the time to fold (and therefore are unfolded)are discriminated from
and provide a matrix that couples retention to folding1,4. A distinctive feature of the those that have failed to fold after many attempts (misfolded), and
ER is its ability to catalyse opposite reactions: folding and unfolding, oxidation and must therefore be disposed of. One way of timing glycoprotein quali-
reduction, protein import and export through Sec61. It is debated whether a ‘quality- ty control involves the sequential processing of N-glycans and in par-
control compartment’12,39, involved in the recognition and targeting of terminally ticular mannose trimming in the ER22. It remains to be seen how sub-
misfolded proteins (alluded to in the picture by having ERAD factors concentrated on strates are eventually targeted to the retrotranslocation channels,
the left), exists. ERGIC, ER–Golgi intermediate compartment. how these are opened, and to what extent proteins must be unfolded
to negotiate dislocation8,21.
892 © 2003 Nature PublishingG

Chunk 9:
annose trimming in the ER22. It remains to be seen how sub-
misfolded proteins (alluded to in the picture by having ERAD factors concentrated on strates are eventually targeted to the retrotranslocation channels,
the left), exists. ERGIC, ER–Golgi intermediate compartment. how these are opened, and to what extent proteins must be unfolded
to negotiate dislocation8,21.
892 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---

insight progress
Table 1Personnel of the ER protein factory in mammalian cells
RB SER Ubiquitous ER-resident proteins
Family Main members Functions
RER
Endo- Hsp70 BiP/grp78 Chaperone
lysosomes Hsp90 Endoplasmin/grp94 Chaperone
Hsp40 ERdj1–ERdj5, Sec63 Co-chaperones regulating BiP?
ERGIC Lectins Calnexin and calreticulin Glycoprotein quality control
EDEM Glycoprotein degradation22
Glycan-processing UGT Folding sensor. Adds glucoses to
Nucleus
enzymes misfolded glycoproteins (enters
P substrates into the calnexin cycle)5,6
Golgi ER glucosidases I and II Remove glucoses from N-glycans
(on/off/calnexin cycle)5,6
NE Peroxisomes ER mannosidases I and II Remove terminal mannoses —
ERAD?22
Peptidyl–prolyl Cyclophilins, FK506-binding Isomerize cis-transpeptidyl-
CER
isomerases proteins prolyl bonds?
Ero1 Ero1a, Ero1b Disulphide-bond formation7,8
Oxidoreductases PDI, ERp72, ERp57, p5, and Disulphide-bond formation,
many others isomerization and reduction
Figure 2The ER is not always that rough. Distinct ER subcompartments can be
clearly identified: the nuclear envelope (NE), and rough and smooth stacks (RER
Examples of specific folding assistants
and SER). In plant cells, dilated ER cisternae are used for protein storage. In
Name Tissue distribution Function
mammalian cells, they are generally associated with the accumulation of mutated
PDIp Pancreas Oxidoreductase
or transport-incompetent proteins produced in excess with respect to ERAD Hsp47 and prolyl-Cells producing collagen Collagen synthesis and
ca

Chunk 10:
ples of specific folding assistants
and SER). In plant cells, dilated ER cisternae are used for protein storage. In
Name Tissue distribution Function
mammalian cells, they are generally associated with the accumulation of mutated
PDIp Pancreas Oxidoreductase
or transport-incompetent proteins produced in excess with respect to ERAD Hsp47 and prolyl-Cells producing collagen Collagen synthesis and
capacity (for example, Russell bodies, RB30). Additional ER subdomains were 4-hydroxylase assembly24
Invariant chain Antigen presenting cells MHC class II assembly and
identified recently, including a peroxisome precursor compartment (P) and the
transport
cortical ER (CER) in yeast40,41. Selected mRNAs seem to be targeted to the Tapasin Ubiquitous Peptide binding to MHC class I3
storage domains of plant ERs as well as to the yeast CER, thus favouring RAP Ubiquitous LDL receptor assembly and
transport
subcompartmentalization. ER subdomains could exist at an even smaller scale11.
BOCA/Mesd ? LDL receptor assembly and
For instance, different complexes of ER folding factors in the ER may fulfil transport42
sequential (and often opposite) tasks during protein maturation in the ER, and Egasyn Ubiquitous Quality control of b-glucuronidase
Carboxylesterase Hepatocytes Quality control of C reactive
membrane sub-domains might exist. proteins
SCAP Ubiquitous Retention of SREBP18
The unfolded protein response and signalling from the ER
To maintain the efficiency of quality-control mechanisms in diverse clear the ER, apoptosis is induced through several pathways16,17,26. This
physiological conditions, living cells have evolved regulatory circuits link has important consequences for the pathogenesis of degenerative
that monitor the levels of available chaperones. This is true for both disorders (see the progress in this issue by Goldberg, page 895).
the cytosol and the ER, and compartment-specific responses clearly The UPR is multi-faceted and regulates proteins involved in
exist that sele

Chunk 11:
ions, living cells have evolved regulatory circuits link has important consequences for the pathogenesis of degenerative
that monitor the levels of available chaperones. This is true for both disorders (see the progress in this issue by Goldberg, page 895).
the cytosol and the ER, and compartment-specific responses clearly The UPR is multi-faceted and regulates proteins involved in
exist that selectively restore optimal levels of the desired folding fac- quality control, ERAD and many aspects of the secretory pathway27.
tors. The accumulation of aberrant proteins in the cytosol triggers It is emerging as a key controller of normal development as well. Par-
the heat-shock response, resulting in de novosynthesis of hsp70 and ticularly compelling in this respect is the observation that plasma-cell
other cytosolic chaperones23. But if aberrant proteins accumulate in differentiation requires XBP-1 (ref. 28). However, attenuating trans-
the ER, cells activate a different response, the unfolded protein lation through PERK would be counterproductive for plasma cells,
response (UPR), which leads to the coordinated synthesis of ER-resi- which must release antibodies in large quantities26. It remains to be
dent chaperones and enzymes. The UPR is induced by drugs that seen whether cells can selectively activate individual branches of the
block N-linked glycosylation or disulphide-bond formation, or alter UPR. One possibility is that the different ER-resident proteins con-
calcium ion homeostasis, thus selectively targeting the ER folding taining a DnaJ motif (ERdj)29might preferentially release BiP from
machinery16,17. Physiologically, ER stress (a condition in which the one of the three UPR sensors, similar to the way in which E3 ligases
folding machinery in the ER cannot cope with its protein load) can be confer specificity on E1 and E2 proteins.
caused by synthesis of mutated or orphan proteins, absence of cofac-
tors (an example being scurvy, in which collagen cannot fold b

Chunk 12:
y release BiP from
machinery16,17. Physiologically, ER stress (a condition in which the one of the three UPR sensors, similar to the way in which E3 ligases
folding machinery in the ER cannot cope with its protein load) can be confer specificity on E1 and E2 proteins.
caused by synthesis of mutated or orphan proteins, absence of cofac-
tors (an example being scurvy, in which collagen cannot fold because ER quality control and disease
of the lack of vitamin C24), or a drastic increase in otherwise normal Quality control must be a balance between retaining and degrading
cargo proteins. potentially harmful products and not preventing export of biologi-
How do the diverse unfolded or misfolded proteins that accu- cally active proteins. CFTR mutants in cystic fibrosis illustrate an
mulate in the ER provoke the same pathway? The unifying concept is overzealous quality control, where biologically active mutants can-
that BiP and other primary quality-control factors maintain the not leave the ER. In this case, relaxing the quality control could cure
stress sensors in the ER in the inactive state16,17, so that chaperone the patient. But disease can also originate from defective degrada-
insufficiency triggers UPR whatever the nature of the cargo. tion. If the rate of synthesis of a protein exceeds the combined rates of
The mammalian ER sensors, Ire1, PERK and ATF6, guarantee folding and degradation, a fraction of it will accumulate intracellu-
a tripartite response with synergic strategies16,17. By phosphorylating larly. At least two bottlenecks are encountered by ERAD substrates:
eIF2a, PERK transiently attenuates translation, limiting protein dislocation across the membrane and actual degradation by the pro-
load. ATF6 drives the transcriptional upregulation of many ER-resi- teasome. Inefficient proteolysis often results in the formation of
dent proteins and folding assistants. Ire1 activates XBP-1, which in deposits of ubiquitylated proteins in the pericentriolar region,

Chunk 13:
eIF2a, PERK transiently attenuates translation, limiting protein dislocation across the membrane and actual degradation by the pro-
load. ATF6 drives the transcriptional upregulation of many ER-resi- teasome. Inefficient proteolysis often results in the formation of
dent proteins and folding assistants. Ire1 activates XBP-1, which in deposits of ubiquitylated proteins in the pericentriolar region, called
turn induces transcription of factors that facilitate ER-associated aggresomes30. Studies with the prion protein suggest that mislocal-
degradation (ERAD). The two-step activation of XBP-1 (transcrip- ization to the cytosol is sufficient to cause conversion into the PrPsc
tionally induced by ATF6 and post-transcriptionally regulated by form31,32. By contrast, inefficient dislocation results in substrates
Ire1) guarantees the proper timing of the UPR; attempts to fold pro- accumulating in the ER. Many ER storage diseases are characterized
teins precede the decision to degrade them25. If the response fails to by the presence of dilated ER cisternae containing mutated pro-
NATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature © 2003 Nature PublishingGroup 893

---PAGE BREAK---

insight progress
teins30. It is not clear whether these aberrant structures are toxic per se 11. Meunier, L., Usherwood, Y. K., Chung, K. T. & Hendershot, L. M. A subset of chaperones and folding
or whether they represent a defence mechanism that segregates dan- enzymes form multiprotein complexes in endoplasmic reticulum to bind nascent proteins. Mol. Biol.
Cell13,4456–4469 (2002).
gerous proteins into specialized ER subcompartments (Fig. 2). The
12. Hendershot, L. M. Giving protein traffic the green light. Nature Cell Biol.2,E105–E106 (2000).
tendency of the mutated protein to sequester chaperones, and hence 13. Herrmann, J. M., Malkus, P. & Schekman, R. Out of the ER — outfitters, escorts and guides. Trends
to induce a prolonged UPR leading to apoptosis, is probably impor- Cell Biol.9,5–7 

Chunk 14:
nto specialized ER subcompartments (Fig. 2). The
12. Hendershot, L. M. Giving protein traffic the green light. Nature Cell Biol.2,E105–E106 (2000).
tendency of the mutated protein to sequester chaperones, and hence 13. Herrmann, J. M., Malkus, P. & Schekman, R. Out of the ER — outfitters, escorts and guides. Trends
to induce a prolonged UPR leading to apoptosis, is probably impor- Cell Biol.9,5–7 (1999).
tant in determining cell damage. 14. Sitia, R.et al.Developmental regulation of IgM secretion: the role of the carboxy-terminal cysteine.
Cell60,781–790 (1990).
Proteasome inhibitors are powerful inducers of the UPR, proba-
15. Shen, J., Chen, X., Hendershot, L. & Prywes, R. ER stress regulation of ATF6 localization by
bly because dislocation of many substrates is coupled to degradation. dissociation of BiP/GRP78 binding and unmasking of Golgi localization signals. Dev. Cell.3,99–111
Receiving substrates from both ER and cytosol, proteasomes are (2002).
16. Kaufman, R. J. Orchestrating the unfolded protein response in health and disease. J. Clin. Invest.110,
crossroads of the two main protein quality-control systems. Condi-
1389–1398 (2002).
tions that hamper proteasome function, such as the presence of pro- 17. Harding, H. P., Calfon, M., Urano, F., Novoa, I. & Ron, D. Transcriptional and translational control in
teins with polyglutamine repeats33,34or a lack of E3 ligases35, therefore the mammalian unfolded protein response. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.18,575–599 (2002).
can cause accumulation of ERAD substrates in the ER and activate 18. Brown, A., Sun, L., Feramisco, J., Brown, M. & Goldstein, J. Cholesterol addition to ER membranes
alters conformation of SCAP, the SREBP escort protein that regulates cholesterol metabolism. Mol.
UPR-dependent apoptotic pathways. In this way, proteotoxicity
Cell 10,237–245 (2002).
could be transmitted across compartments, with important implica- 19. Rivera, V. M. et al.Regulation of protein secretion through controlled aggregation 

Chunk 15:
Brown, M. & Goldstein, J. Cholesterol addition to ER membranes
alters conformation of SCAP, the SREBP escort protein that regulates cholesterol metabolism. Mol.
UPR-dependent apoptotic pathways. In this way, proteotoxicity
Cell 10,237–245 (2002).
could be transmitted across compartments, with important implica- 19. Rivera, V. M. et al.Regulation of protein secretion through controlled aggregation in the endoplasmic
tions for degenerative diseases (reviewed in refs 35, 36). reticulum. Science287,826–830 (2000).
20. Tsai, B., Ye, Y. & Rapoport, T. A. Retro-translocation of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into
the cytosol. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.3,246–255 (2002).
Perspectives
21. Kostova, Z. & Wolf, D. H. For whom the bell tolls: protein quality control of the endoplasmic
Over the past few years, much has been learned about how proteins reticulum and the ubiquitin-proteasome connection. EMBO J.22,2309–2317 (2003).
are handled by the ER folding and quality-control machineries, and 22. Wang, T. & Hebert, D. N. EDEM an ER quality control receptor. Nature Struct. Biol.10,319–321
(2003).
some of this knowledge has begun to be translated to industry and
23. Morimoto, R. I. Regulation of the heat shock transcriptional response: cross talk between a family of
to the clinic. Yet, many questions remain: how does aggregation heat shock factors, molecular chaperones, and negative regulators. Genes Dev.12,3788–3796 (1998).
relate to degradation? Are aggregation and degradation sometimes 24. Hosokawa, N. & Nagata, K. Procollagen binds to both prolyl 4-hydroxylase/protein disulfide
mutually exclusive, with aggregation preventing dislocation? In isomerase and HSP47 within the endoplasmic reticulum in the absence of ascorbate. FEBS Lett.466,
19–25 (2000).
what circumstances does this happen? How does aggregation relate
25. Yoshida, H. et al.A time-dependent phase shift in the mammalian unfolded protein response. Dev.
to amyloid formation, and how can aggregates be eliminate

Chunk 16:
de
mutually exclusive, with aggregation preventing dislocation? In isomerase and HSP47 within the endoplasmic reticulum in the absence of ascorbate. FEBS Lett.466,
19–25 (2000).
what circumstances does this happen? How does aggregation relate
25. Yoshida, H. et al.A time-dependent phase shift in the mammalian unfolded protein response. Dev.
to amyloid formation, and how can aggregates be eliminated? How Cell4,265–271 (2003).
do cells secrete large molecular ensembles, such as procollagen and 26. Ma, Y. & Hendershot, L. M. The unfolding tale of the unfolded protein response. Cell107,827–830
viruses? Even before complete answers are provided, new strategies (2001).
27. Higashio, H. & Kohno, K. A genetic link between the unfolded protein response and vesicle
for intervention are being considered to prevent viral replication,
formation from the endoplasmic reticulum. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.296,568–574 (2002).
protein aggregation or amyloid formation. The most important 28. Reimold, A. M. et al.Plasma cell differentiation requires the transcription factor XBP-1. Nature412,
question is whether the folding of a protein can be influenced 300–307 (2001).
29. Cunnea, P. M. et al.ERdj5, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident protein containing DnaJ and
specifically, with the goals either of curing a disease or of preventing
thioredoxin domains, is expressed in secretory cells or following ER stress. J. Biol. Chem.278,
virus assembly. Chemical chaperones and ligand-induced trans- 1059–1066 (2003).
port opens options for designing specific drugs to control protein 30. Kopito, R. R. & Sitia, R. Aggresomes and Russell bodies. EMBO Rep. 1,225–231 (2000).
(mis)folding or transport37,38. Likewise, tissue-specific chaperones 31. Ma, J., Wollmann, R. & Lindquist, S. Neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration when PrP accumulates in
the cytosol. Science298,1781–1785 (2002).
might be therapeutic targets and might provide important tools in
32. Hegde, R. S. & Rane, N. S. Prion protein tra

Chunk 17:
R. & Sitia, R. Aggresomes and Russell bodies. EMBO Rep. 1,225–231 (2000).
(mis)folding or transport37,38. Likewise, tissue-specific chaperones 31. Ma, J., Wollmann, R. & Lindquist, S. Neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration when PrP accumulates in
the cytosol. Science298,1781–1785 (2002).
might be therapeutic targets and might provide important tools in
32. Hegde, R. S. & Rane, N. S. Prion protein trafficking and the development of neurodegeneration.
biotechnology. Will we be able to reduce protein misfolding in Trends Neurosci.26,337–339 (2003).
degenerative disorders, or induce it in some tumours so as to cause 33. Nishitoh, H. et al.ASK1 is essential for endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced neuronal cell death
apoptosis? Last but not least, the UPR signalling cascades clearly triggered by expanded polyglutamine repeats. Genes Dev.16,1345–1355 (2002).
34. Bence, N. F., Sampat, R. M. & Kopito, R. R. Impairment of the ubiquitin–proteasome system by
offer targets for pharmacological intervention. Drugs that modu-
protein aggregation. Science292,1552–1555 (2001).
late the UPR may alleviate a variety of age-related diseases resulting 35. Imai, Y. et al.An unfolded putative transmembrane polypeptide, which can lead to endoplasmic
from protein misfolding and aggregation. nn reticulum stress, is a substrate of Parkin. Cell105,891–902 (2001).
36. Yoneda, T., Urano, F. & Ron, D. Transmission of proteotoxicity across cellular compartments. Genes
Dev.16,1307–1313 (2002).
doi:10.1038/nature02262 37. Brown, C. R., Hong-Brown, L. Q. & Welch, W. J. Correcting temperature-sensitive protein folding
1. Ellgaard, L. & Helenius, A. Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.4, defects. J. Clin. Invest.99,1432–1444 (1997).
181–191 (2003). 38. Aridor, M. & Balch, W. E. Perspectives: drug delivery. Regulating export of ER cargo. Science287,
2. Fewell, S. W., Travers, K. J., Weissman, J. S. & Brodsky, J. L. The action of molecular chaperones in the 816–817 (2000)

Chunk 18:
lding
1. Ellgaard, L. & Helenius, A. Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.4, defects. J. Clin. Invest.99,1432–1444 (1997).
181–191 (2003). 38. Aridor, M. & Balch, W. E. Perspectives: drug delivery. Regulating export of ER cargo. Science287,
2. Fewell, S. W., Travers, K. J., Weissman, J. S. & Brodsky, J. L. The action of molecular chaperones in the 816–817 (2000).
early secretory pathway. Annu. Rev. Genet.35,149–191 (2001). 39. Kamhi-Nesher, S. et al. A novel quality control compartment derived from the endoplasmic
3. Bouvier, M. Accessory proteins and the assembly of human class I MHC molecules: a molecular and reticulum. Mol. Biol. Cell12,1711–1723 (2001).
structural perspective. Mol. Immunol.39,697–706 (2003). 40. Voeltz, G. K., Rolls, M. M. & Rapoport, T. A. Structural organization of the endoplasmic reticulum.
4. Ellgaard, L., Molinari, M. & Helenius, A. Setting the standards: quality control in the secretory EMBO Rep.3,944–950 (2002).
pathway. Science286,1882–1888 (1999). 41. Papp, S., Dziak, E., Michalak, M. & Opas, M. Is all of the endoplasmic reticulum created equal? The
5. Schrag, J. D., Procopio, D. O., Cygler, M., Thomas, D. Y. & Bergeron, J. J. Lectin control of protein effects of the heterogeneous distribution of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-handling proteins. J. Cell
folding and sorting in the secretory pathway. Trends Biochem. Sci.28, 49–57 (2003). Biol.160,475–479 (2003).
6. Helenius, A. & Aebi, M. Intracellular functions of N-linked glycans. Science291,2364–2369 (2001). 42. Herz, J. and Marschang, P. Coaxing the LDL receptor family into the fold. Cell112,289–292 (2003).
7. Sevier, C. S. & Kaiser, C. A. Formation and transfer of disulphide bonds in living cells. Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol.3,836–847 (2002).
Acknowledgments We thank members of our laboratories for their criticisms and
8. Fassio, A. & Sitia, R. Formation, isomerisation and reduction of disulphide bonds during protein
enthusiasm, D. Ron for helpful sugge

Chunk 19:
r family into the fold. Cell112,289–292 (2003).
7. Sevier, C. S. & Kaiser, C. A. Formation and transfer of disulphide bonds in living cells. Nature Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol.3,836–847 (2002).
Acknowledgments We thank members of our laboratories for their criticisms and
8. Fassio, A. & Sitia, R. Formation, isomerisation and reduction of disulphide bonds during protein
enthusiasm, D. Ron for helpful suggestions, T. Mastrandrea for secretarial assistance, and
quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum. Histochem. Cell Biol.117,151–157 (2002).
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC), Italian Ministries of Health,
9. Harding, H. P. et al.An integrated stress response regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance to
Education and Research (CoFin and Center of Excellence in Physiopathology of Cell
oxidative stress. Mol. Cell11,619–633 (2003).
Differentiation), NWO and Telethon for financial support. We apologize to the many
10. van Anken, E. et al.Sequential waves of functionally related proteins are expressed when B cells
colleagues whose seminal work we could not cite because of space limitations.
prepare for antibody secretion. Immunity18,243–253 (2003).
894 © 2003 Nature PublishingGroupNATURE|VOL 426|18/25 DECEMBER 2003|www.nature.com/nature

---PAGE BREAK---



