Chunk 1:
JNeuralTransm(2011)118:821–839
DOI10.1007/s00702-010-0482-8
BASIC NEUROSCIENCES, GENETICS AND IMMUNOLOGY - REVIEW ARTICLE
Neuropathology of sporadic Parkinson disease
before the appearance of parkinsonism:
preclinical Parkinson disease
Isidre Ferrer • Anna Martinez • Rosa Blanco •
Ester Dalfo´ • Margarita Carmona
Received:26July2010/Accepted:30August2010/Publishedonline:23September2010
(cid:2)Springer-Verlag2010
Abstract Parkinsondisease(PD)isnolongerconsidered altered oxidative stress responses, altered balance of
a complex motor disorder characterized by parkinsonism L-ferritin and H-ferritin, reduced expression of neuronal
but rather a systemic disease with variegated non-motor globinaandbchainsinneuronswitha-synucleindeposits,
deficits and neurological symptoms, including impaired increased expression of endoplasmic reticulum stress
olfaction, sleep disorders, gastrointestinal and urinary markers, increased p62 and ubiquitin immunoreactivity in
abnormalities and cardiovascular dysfunction, in addition relation to a-synuclein deposits, and altered distribution of
to other symptoms and signs such as pain, depression and LC3 and other autophagosome/lysosome markers. In spite
mooddisorders.Manyofthesealterationsappearbeforeor of the relatively small decrease in the number of dopami-
inparallelwithmotordeficitsandthenworsenwithdisease nergicneuronsinthesubstantianigra,whichdoesnotreach
progression. Although there is a close relation between thresholds causative of parkinsonism, levels of tyrosine
motor symptoms and the presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) hydroxylase and cannabinoid 1 receptor are reduced,
and neurites filled with abnormal a-synuclein, other neu- whereas levels of adenosine receptor 2A are increased in
rological alterations are independent of LBs, thereby the caudate in pPD. Moreover, biochemical alterations are
indicating that different mechanisms probably converge in also present in the cerebral cortex (at least in the frontal
the degenerative process. Th

Chunk 2:
d 1 receptor are reduced,
and neurites filled with abnormal a-synuclein, other neu- whereas levels of adenosine receptor 2A are increased in
rological alterations are independent of LBs, thereby the caudate in pPD. Moreover, biochemical alterations are
indicating that different mechanisms probably converge in also present in the cerebral cortex (at least in the frontal
the degenerative process. This review presents cardinal cortex) in pPD including increased oxidative stress and
observations at very early stages of PD and provides per- oxidative damage to proteins a-synuclein, b-synuclein,
sonalexperiencebasedonthestudyofaconsecutiveseries superoxide dismutase 2, aldolase A, enolase 1, and glyc-
of brains with PD-related pathology and without parkin- eraldehyde dehydrogenase, among others, indicating post-
sonism, mainly cases categorized as stages 2–3 of Braak. translational modifications of PD-related proteins, and
Alterations in the substantia nigra, striatum and frontal suggesting altered function of pathways involved in gly-
cortex in pPD are here revised in detail. Early modifica- colysis and energy metabolism in the cerebral cortex in
tions in the substantia nigra at pre-motor stages of PD pPD. Current evidence suggests convergence of several
(preclinical PD: pPD) include abnormal small aggregates altered metabolic pathways leading to chronic neuronal
of a-synuclein which is phosphorylated, nitrated and oxi- dysfunction, mainly manifested as sub-optimal energy
dized, and which exhibits abnormal solubility and trunca- metabolism, altered synaptic function, oxidative and
tion. This occurs in association with a plethora of altered endoplasmic reticulum stress damage and corresponding
molecular events including increased oxidative stress, altered responses, among others. By understanding that
these alterations occur at very early stages of PD and that
neuronal fatigue and exhaustion may precede, for years,
I.Ferrer(&)(cid:2)A.Martinez(cid:2)R.Blanco(cid:2)E.Dalfo

Chunk 3:
nd
tion. This occurs in association with a plethora of altered endoplasmic reticulum stress damage and corresponding
molecular events including increased oxidative stress, altered responses, among others. By understanding that
these alterations occur at very early stages of PD and that
neuronal fatigue and exhaustion may precede, for years,
I.Ferrer(&)(cid:2)A.Martinez(cid:2)R.Blanco(cid:2)E.Dalfo´ (cid:2) cell death and neuronal loss, we may direct therapeutic
M.Carmona strategies towards the prevention and delay of disease
InstitutdeNeuropatologia,ServeiAnatomiaPatolo`gica, progression starting at pre-parkinsonian stages of PD.
CIBERNED,IDIBELL-HospitalUniversitarideBellvitge,
UniversitatdeBarcelona,carrerFeixaLLargasn,
Keywords Preclinical Parkinson disease (cid:2)
08907HospitaletdeLLobregat,Spain
e-mail:8082ifa@gmail.com Incidental Lewy body disease (cid:2) Oxidative stress (cid:2)
123

---PAGE BREAK---

822 I.Ferreretal.
Endoplasmic reticulum stress (cid:2) Haemoglobin (cid:2) insolublefibrils(Spillantinietal.1997;Wakabayashietal.
Mitochondria (cid:2) Olfaction (cid:2) Cerebral cortex (cid:2) Striatum (cid:2) 1997; Baba et al. 1998; Hashimoto and Masliah 1999;
Synuclein (cid:2) Glycolysis Dudaetal.2000;Giassonetal.2000;Fujiwaraetal.2002;
Anderson et al. 2006).
Systematic study of cases with LB pathology has
Introduction prompted a staging classification of PD based on the
putative progression of LB pathology from the medulla
Parkinson disease is clinically characterized by a complex oblongata (and olfactory bulb) to the midbrain, dience-
motor disorder known as parkinsonism and is manifested phalic nuclei, and neocortex (Braak et al. 2002, 2003,
principally by resting tremor, slowness of initial move- 2004). Stage 1 is characterized by LBs and neurites in the
ment, rigidity and general postural instability. These dorsal IX/X motor nuclei and/or intermediate reticular
symptoms are mainly due to the loss of dopaminergic zone; there is also myenteric plexus involv

Chunk 4:
onism and is manifested phalic nuclei, and neocortex (Braak et al. 2002, 2003,
principally by resting tremor, slowness of initial move- 2004). Stage 1 is characterized by LBs and neurites in the
ment, rigidity and general postural instability. These dorsal IX/X motor nuclei and/or intermediate reticular
symptoms are mainly due to the loss of dopaminergic zone; there is also myenteric plexus involvement. Stage 2
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, first the affects the medulla oblongata and pontine tegmentum and
lateral tier followed by the medial region, leading to coverspathologyofstage1pluslesionsinthecaudalraphe
reduced dopaminergic input to the striatum, and accom- nuclei, gigantocellular reticular nucleus, and coeruleus–
panied by adaptive responses in the internal and external subcoeruleus complex; the olfactory bulb is also involved.
globus pallidus, subthalamus, thalamus and substantia Stage3referstopathologyofstage2plusmidbrainlesions,
nigraparsreticularis.Round,hyalineneuronalcytoplasmic particularly in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra.
inclusionscalledLewybodies(LBs),andenlargedaberrant Stage 4 includes basal prosencephalon and mesocortex
neurites and threads are found in the parkinsonian sub- (corticalinvolvementconfinedtothetransentorhinalregion
stantia nigra (Forno 1996; Jellinger and Mizuno 2003). In and allocortex, and CA2 plexus) pathology in addition to
addition to the substantia nigra, other nuclei are involved lesionsinthemidbrain,ponsandmedullaoblongata.Stage
such as the locus coeruleus, reticular nuclei of the brain 5extendstosensoryassociationareasoftheneocortexand
stem,anddorsalmotornucleusofthevagus,aswellasthe prefrontal neocortex. Stage 6 includes, in addition, lesions
basal nucleus of Meynert, the amygdala and the CA2 area infirstordersensoryassociationareasoftheneocortexand
of the hippocampus. LBs and aberrant neurites as well are pre-motor areas; occasionally there are also mild changes
found in these locations (Forn

Chunk 5:
yassociationareasoftheneocortexand
stem,anddorsalmotornucleusofthevagus,aswellasthe prefrontal neocortex. Stage 6 includes, in addition, lesions
basal nucleus of Meynert, the amygdala and the CA2 area infirstordersensoryassociationareasoftheneocortexand
of the hippocampus. LBs and aberrant neurites as well are pre-motor areas; occasionally there are also mild changes
found in these locations (Forno 1996; Braak et al. 1999; in primary sensory areas and the primary motor field.
Dickson 2001; Goedert 2001; Jellinger and Mizuno 2003; This classification shows an acceptable correlation
Braak and del Tredici 2008). betweenpathologicalfindingsandclinicaldata,mainlyina
Cases with LB pathology in the brain stem without subgroup of cases with early onset and prolonged duration
parkinsonismareconsideredincidentalLBdiseasebecause in which motor symptoms (parkinsonism) are clearly
they are unexpectedly discovered following appropriate dependent on the damage of dopaminergic neurons in the
post-mortem neuropathological study (Jellinger 2004, substantia nigra pars compacta (Braak et al. 2002, 2005;
2009; Saito et al. 2004). Whether these cases constitute Jellinger 2004; Wolters and Braak 2006). Thus, stages
pre-parkinsonian PD has been a matter of controversy for 1 and 2 are not accompanied by parkinsonism and they
some years, as nobody can ensure that these cases would fulfilthecriteriaofpPD.Casesatstage3maypresentwith
have progressed to parkinsonism if they had survived for parkinsonism depending on the amount of cell loss in the
longer times. However, the study of consecutive cases in substantia nigra. More strictly, pPD occurs in cases with
large series and the recognition of several intermediate LB pathology limited to selected nuclei of the medulla
degreesofinvolvementofthebrainstem,limbicstructures oblongata and pons, and in cases with a few LBs in the
and, eventually, the cerebral cortex make it clear that a substantia nigra but without substantial nigral neuron loss
predi

Chunk 6:
substantia nigra. More strictly, pPD occurs in cases with
large series and the recognition of several intermediate LB pathology limited to selected nuclei of the medulla
degreesofinvolvementofthebrainstem,limbicstructures oblongata and pons, and in cases with a few LBs in the
and, eventually, the cerebral cortex make it clear that a substantia nigra but without substantial nigral neuron loss
prediction of preclinical PD (pPD) as an anterior stage of not surpassing a determined threshold, usually considered
PD seems more than reasonable (Jellinger and Mizuno as 60% of the total population of dopaminergic neurons
2003; Braak and del Tredici 2008; Dickson et al. 2008). of the pars compacta (Jellinger and Mizuno 2003;
LBsandneuritesarecomposedofaggregatesofnormal, DelleDonne et al. 2008).
misfolded and truncated proteins, and ubiquitin, which are Cumulative clinical evidence reveals that olfactory
storedinthecytoplasmasnon-degradedby-productsofthe dysfunction, dysautonomia, sleep fragmentation, rapid eye
degenerative process (Schults 2006; Wakabayashi et al. movementbehaviourdisorder,moodandanxietydisorders,
2007; Leverenz et al. 2007; Xia et al. 2008). The main and depression may precede parkinsonian symptoms in a
component of LBs and aberrant neurites is a-synuclein number of patients with PD clinically characterized by
whichisabnormallyphosphorylated,nitratedandoxidized, parkinsonism (Chaudhuri et al. 2005; Postuma et al. 2006;
has an abnormal crystallographic structure and abnormal Iranzo et al. 2006; Siderowf and Stern 2008; Tolosa et al.
solubility, and is prone to the formation of aggregates and 2007; Poewe 2007, 2008; Ziemssen and Reichmann 2007;
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 823
Herting et al. 2008; Ross et al. 2008; Natale et al. 2008). mixedpathologywasverycommon.AD-relatedpathology
Whether these clinical symptoms are associated with LBs wasfoundin81%ofcases(40%stagesI–IIofBraak,46%
in selected regions of the central, autonom

Chunk 7:
rmation of aggregates and 2007; Poewe 2007, 2008; Ziemssen and Reichmann 2007;
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 823
Herting et al. 2008; Ross et al. 2008; Natale et al. 2008). mixedpathologywasverycommon.AD-relatedpathology
Whether these clinical symptoms are associated with LBs wasfoundin81%ofcases(40%stagesI–IIofBraak,46%
in selected regions of the central, autonomous and corresponding to stages III–IV, and 14% to stages V and
peripheral nervous systems is a matter of study. VI), argyrophilic grain disease and other tauopathies in
a-Synuclein pathology affecting neurons and neurites 24%, vascular pathology in 28%, and other pathological
occurs in the olfactory bulb and related olfactory nuclei at conditions in 12%. Some cases had multiple pathologies
very early stages of cases with PD-related pathology (mainly LB disease, AD and vascular pathology including
(Daniel and Hawkes 1992; Pearce et al. 1995; Del Tredici lacunae, multi-infarct encephalopathy, haemorrhages and
et al. 2002; Braak et al. 2004; Bloch et al. 2006; Hubbard demyelination of the centrum semi-ovale reminiscent of
et al. 2007). Binswanger encephalopathy). These figures are similar to
Thecardiovascularautonomicsystemisalsoaffectedin thosealreadyreportedinotherseries(Jellinger2004,2008,
pPD and PD, and alterations implicate both tyrosine 2009, 2010; Braak et al. 2006; Markesbery et al. 2009;
hydroxylase-positive (extrinsic) and negative (intrinsic) Beach et al. 2009;Dickson et al. 2010).
nerves of the cardiac plexus (Iwanaga et al. 1999). The distribution of PD-related pathology in our series
Together, these observations can be summarized as hasagradientwithage;caseswithstages5and6areolder
follows:(a)variegatednon-motordeficitsandneurological as a group than cases at stage 4. However, a number of
symptoms, covering impaired olfaction, sleep disorders, cases at stages 1 and 2 were remarkably aged. More than
gastrointestinal and urinary abnormalities and cardiovas- half w

Chunk 8:
y in our series
Together, these observations can be summarized as hasagradientwithage;caseswithstages5and6areolder
follows:(a)variegatednon-motordeficitsandneurological as a group than cases at stage 4. However, a number of
symptoms, covering impaired olfaction, sleep disorders, cases at stages 1 and 2 were remarkably aged. More than
gastrointestinal and urinary abnormalities and cardiovas- half were older than 75, indicating that, within the same
culardysfunction,inadditiontoothersymptomsandsigns age interval, some patients had suffered from fully devel-
aspain,depressionandmooddisorders,mayoccuratearly opedPDwhereasothershadremainedatpre-motorstages.
stages of the disease. (b) A relationship between neuro- These findings are inline with the observation that, at least
logical symptoms and Lewy pathology exists, but it is not some cases of incidental LB disease could represent pre-
clear whether the severity of morphological lesions corre- clinical PD, arrested PD, or a partial syndrome due to a
lates with clinical symptoms. (c) Olfactory tests, poly- lesser burden of causative factors (Frigerio et al. 2009).
somnographic studies and MIBG myocardial scintigraphy Forthepresentpurposes,parkinsonism(includingslight
incombinationmaybeusedtodiscoverearlysignaturesof motor symptoms, revealed by relatives following an
the disease (Stiasny-Kolster et al. 2005). unbiased post-morteminterview incasesthathadnotbeen
Lack ofcorrelationbetweena-synucleinaggregatesand diagnosed during life) occurred in 68% of the cases.
impaired function is dramatically represented in relation Excluding atypical cases, pPD was seen in 28 cases of
withcognitiveandmentalfunctions.Retrospectiveclinical stages 1–2, 10 cases of stage 3, and 3 cases of stage 4.
and pathologic studies have shown that there is no rela- Morphological studies of the substantia nigra were carried
tionship between LB stage and severity of cognitive outinthisgroup.Innoneofthesecasesdidnervecellloss
impairment in advanced stage

Chunk 9:
typical cases, pPD was seen in 28 cases of
withcognitiveandmentalfunctions.Retrospectiveclinical stages 1–2, 10 cases of stage 3, and 3 cases of stage 4.
and pathologic studies have shown that there is no rela- Morphological studies of the substantia nigra were carried
tionship between LB stage and severity of cognitive outinthisgroup.Innoneofthesecasesdidnervecellloss
impairment in advanced stages of PD (Parkkinen et al. in the substantia nigra exceed 50% of the total number of
2005;Weismanetal.2007;Parkkinenetal.2008;Jellinger dopaminergic neurons as revealed by quantitative studies
2008, 2009). usingtyrosinehydroxylaseimmunohistochemistry.Asum-
These and other studies have led to the visualization of mary of antibodies used for immunohistochemistry, and
PD as a systemic disease in which functional deficits are single- and double-labelling immunofluorescence and
not exclusively related with LB pathology in neurons and confocal microscopy, is given in Table 1.
neurites. This is dramatically manifested in relation with Molecularstudiesinthefrontalcortexwererestrictedto
cerebral cortex involvement in PD in which variegated 20 pPD cases with no associated pathology or with
pathological molecular events converge to alter neuronal accompanying AD-related changes stages I–II, to exclude
function (Ferrer 2009a). cases in which cortical pathology could interfere with
changes interpreted to be exclusive of pPD. Control sam-
pleswerefromcaseswithnoneuropathologicalchangesor
Neuropathological examination of pPD in a cohort with AD-related pathology stages I–II. Methods employed
of consecutive cases in a general population were mono- and bi-dimensional gel electrophoresis and
western blotting, immunoprecipitation and functional
Over the last 10 years (2001–2010), 115 cases of LB-rela- assays (Dalfo´ et al. 2004, 2005; Dalfo´ and Ferrer 2008;
ted pathology were recovered in a consecutive series of Muntane´ et al. 2008; Mart´ınez et al. 2010).
cases subjected to post-mortem stud

Chunk 10:
nsecutive cases in a general population were mono- and bi-dimensional gel electrophoresis and
western blotting, immunoprecipitation and functional
Over the last 10 years (2001–2010), 115 cases of LB-rela- assays (Dalfo´ et al. 2004, 2005; Dalfo´ and Ferrer 2008;
ted pathology were recovered in a consecutive series of Muntane´ et al. 2008; Mart´ınez et al. 2010).
cases subjected to post-mortem study in a general hospital The present observations are mainly focused on the
(Institut de Neuropatologia, Hospital Universitari de substantianigraparscompacta,caudateandcerebralcortex
Bellvitge).Thesewereclassifiedasstages1–2:24%,stages (frontalcortexarea8)inpPD.Theolfactorybulbandtract
3–4:42%,stages5–6:26%,andatypical:8%.Interestingly, also deserve a brief comment.
123

---PAGE BREAK---

824 I.Ferreretal.
Table1 Antibodies,species,
Antibody Species Manufacturer Dilution
sourceanddilutionusedfor
immunohistochemistryand
ATP-synthasea Mouse BDBiosciences(Madrid,Spain) 1:1,000
immunofluorescenceinthe
CaseinkinaseII Rabbit Stressgen(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:100
presentstudy
COX7A2 Mouse Abnova(Taipei,Taiwan) 1:50
eif2a Rabbit Abcam(Cambridge,UK) 1:100
eif2a-P Rabbit Cellsignalling(Izasa,Barcelona,Spain) 1:100
Ferritin Goat AffinityBioreagents(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:500
Haemoglobin(bchain) Mouse Abcam(Cambridge,UK) 1:200
8-Hydroxy-2 Mouse Abcam(Cambridge,UK) 1:200
deoxyguanosine
LAMP-1 Rabbit Sta.Cruz(Quimigen,Barcelona) 1:100
LAMP-2 Rabbit Sta.Cruz(Quimigen,Barcelona) 1:500
LC-3 Rabbit Cellsignalling(Izasa,Barcelona,Spain) 1:100
Neuroketals Goat Chemicon(Millipore,Madrid,Spain) 1:200
Oxphos Mouse Mitosciences(Eugene,Oregon,USA) 1:1,000
Phospho-p38 Rabbit Cellsignalling(Izasa,Barcelona,Spain) 1:100
p62 Rabbit BIOMOL(Quimigen,Madrid,Spain) 1:500
Peroxiredoxin-2 Rabbit Abcam(Cambridge,UK) 1:1,000
VDAC,porin Mouse Calbiochem(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:300
SOD-1(Cu/Zn) Mouse Novocastra(Newcastle,UK) 1:50
SOD-2(Mn) Rabbit Stressgen(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:100
a-Synuclein Mouse Novocastra

Chunk 11:
phos Mouse Mitosciences(Eugene,Oregon,USA) 1:1,000
Phospho-p38 Rabbit Cellsignalling(Izasa,Barcelona,Spain) 1:100
p62 Rabbit BIOMOL(Quimigen,Madrid,Spain) 1:500
Peroxiredoxin-2 Rabbit Abcam(Cambridge,UK) 1:1,000
VDAC,porin Mouse Calbiochem(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:300
SOD-1(Cu/Zn) Mouse Novocastra(Newcastle,UK) 1:50
SOD-2(Mn) Rabbit Stressgen(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:100
a-Synuclein Mouse Novocastra(Newcastle,UK) 1:100
a-Synuclein Rabbit Chemicon(Millipore,Madrid,Spain),epitope 1:500
111–131
a-Synuclein Rabbit Abcam(Cambridge,UK),epitope11–26 1:100
a-Synuclein Guinea Calbiochem(bioNova,Madrid,Spain),epitope 1:50
pig 123–140
a-Synuclein Mouse ATGen(Montevideo,Uruguay),epitope61–90 1:100
Nitrateda-synuclein Mouse Zymed(SanFrancisco,CA,USA) 1:300
Phospho-a-synuclein Mouse WAKO(Rafer,Madrid,Spain) 1:500
Transferrin Rabbit AffinityBioreagents(bioNova,Madrid,Spain) 1:300
Ubiquitin Rabbit DAKO(Barcelona,Spain) 1:500
Tissuesectionswerepre-treated 8-dOHG Mouse Abcam 1:50
withformicacidfor3minand Tyrosinehydroxylase Mouse Chemicon 1:1,000
thenwith10mMsodiumcitrate
CB-1receptor Rabbit FrontierScience 1:200
bufferpH6for20minat95(cid:3)C
The substantia nigra in pre-motor stages of PD total. Since vascular pathology is not rare in ours and in
other series, we cannot rule out the possibility of primary
It is classically considered that the substantia nigra in pre- vascular lesions in the striatum may account for motor
motor stages of PD is not morphologically affected or deficitsincaseswithPD-relatedpathologystage2inother
damaged to an extent not surpassing a threshold currently series.
accepted as involving less than 60% of the total of dopa-
minergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta. a-Synuclein in the substantia nigra
UsingthestagingnomenclatureofPD-relatedpathologyin
our series, pre-motor or incidental PD may correspond to Animportantissueistherelativeamountofa-synucleinin
stages 1–3. Surprisingly, parkinsonian symptoms have the substantia nigra pars compacta when c

Chunk 12:
epted as involving less than 60% of the total of dopa-
minergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta. a-Synuclein in the substantia nigra
UsingthestagingnomenclatureofPD-relatedpathologyin
our series, pre-motor or incidental PD may correspond to Animportantissueistherelativeamountofa-synucleinin
stages 1–3. Surprisingly, parkinsonian symptoms have the substantia nigra pars compacta when compared with
been reported in stage 2 of Braak (Jellinger 2009). This is other brain regions. Studies in normal human brain are
not our experience: parkinsonian symptoms and signs puzzling since it is not clear whether the substantia nigra
appear at stage 3 in our series and stage 3 may be also and striatum had the lowest (Rockenstein et al. 2001) or
encountered in pPD cases in which decline of substantia the highest levels (Solano et al. 2000) of a-synuclein.
nigra dopaminergic neurons does not exceed 50% of the RegardingPD,comparativestudiesofcontrolanddiseased
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 825
brains are not illuminating. a-Synuclein mRNA levels in dopaminergic neurons before the appearance of LBs in
the PD substantia nigra have been reported to be unmodi- pPD. Finally, oxidative damage of a-synuclein has also
fied, increased, or decreased when compared with age- been found using biochemical methods in the substantia
matchedcontrols(Rockensteinetal.2001;Wirdefeldtetal. nigra in pPD (Dalfo´ and Ferrer 2008). These observations
2001; Kingsbury et al. 2004; Chiba-Falek et al. 2006). indicate that modifications of a-synuclein, including oxi-
Cleaved (truncated) fragments of a-synuclein are prone to dation, nitration and phosphorylation at Ser129, are early
aggregate in vitro and have been considered prime com- eventsinthesubstantianigraatstage3ofPDandoccurin
ponents in LBs (Murray et al. 2003; Li et al. 2005). neurons with punctuate a-synuclein aggregates.
Ourrecentstudieshaveshownconsistentlylowerlevels Truncateda-synucleinvariants,detected

Chunk 13:
 (truncated) fragments of a-synuclein are prone to dation, nitration and phosphorylation at Ser129, are early
aggregate in vitro and have been considered prime com- eventsinthesubstantianigraatstage3ofPDandoccurin
ponents in LBs (Murray et al. 2003; Li et al. 2005). neurons with punctuate a-synuclein aggregates.
Ourrecentstudieshaveshownconsistentlylowerlevels Truncateda-synucleinvariants,detectedwithantibodies
of a-synuclein protein expression in the human substantia raised against different C- and N-terminal epitopes of
nigra and nucleus basalis ofMeynert when compared with a-synuclein, are components of punctate a-synuclein
other brain regions independent of age and pathology. aggregates and LBs (Fig. 2).
Phosphorylated a-synuclein at Ser129 is increased in the These observations indicate that altered expression of
same regions, thus correlating with the total amount of proteins is not restricted to LBs, at least at early stages of
a-synuclein. Additionally, truncated a-synuclein is natu- LBformation.Rather,alteredexpressionofproteinsisseen
rally observed in control and diseased brains, correlating in the vicinity but not within LBs in pPD. On the other
with the total amount of a-synuclein (Muntane´ et al., in hand,thestructureofLBsisnothomogeneousbutdifferent
preparation). forms of a-synuclein are differentially incorporated into
LBs.
a-Synuclein pathology and Lewy inclusions
in the substantia nigra in pPD Mitochondria dysfunction
Phosphorylated a-synuclein at Ser129 is considered a key Deficiencies incomplex I subunits of the respiratory chain
step in the development of a-synuclein aggregates and impaired activity of the electron transport chain are
(Anderson et al. 2006). Phosphorylated a-synuclein at well-known abnormalities in the substantia nigra in spo-
Ser129 co-localizes with a-synuclein in punctuate Lewy- radic PD with parkinsonism (Mizuno et al. 1989; Parker
type aggregates in the substantia nigra at stage 3 of Braak et al. 1989; Schapira 2008; Onyango

Chunk 14:
f a-synuclein aggregates and impaired activity of the electron transport chain are
(Anderson et al. 2006). Phosphorylated a-synuclein at well-known abnormalities in the substantia nigra in spo-
Ser129 co-localizes with a-synuclein in punctuate Lewy- radic PD with parkinsonism (Mizuno et al. 1989; Parker
type aggregates in the substantia nigra at stage 3 of Braak et al. 1989; Schapira 2008; Onyango 2008).
(Fig. 1a–c). It is difficult to ascertain the amount of phos- Early studies showed nomodifications inthe activityof
phorylateda-synucleinofthetotala-synucleinonthebasis mitochondrial complexes II, III and IV in pPD (Jenner
of immunohistochemistry using antibodies that may have etal.1992;Dexteretal.1994).Moreespecially,complexI
different binding capacities to their corresponding sub- activity in pPD was normal or reduced to intermediate
strates. However, double-labelling studies suggest that levels among controls and cases with PD (Jenner et al.
phosphorylated a-synuclein at Ser129 predominates in LB 1992; Dexter et al. 1994). However, studies in total
lesions inpPD. Similar pattern was seen in affected nuclei homogenates do not permit the detection of modifications
of the medulla oblongata and affected neurons in the sub- restricted to individual neurons. The use of immunofluo-
stantia nigra in pPD. Casein kinase II, one of the enzymes rescence with appropriate markers offers limited informa-
thatphosphorylatesa-synucleinatSer129(Ishiietal.2007; tion, as oxphos, porin, cytochrome C oxidase subunits and
Waxman and Giasson 2008), is currently found in LB in ATPsynthaseimmunoreactivitiesarepreservedinneurons
the substantia nigra in advanced stages of PD (Ryu et al. of the substantia nigra pars compacta in stage 3 of Braak,
2008).YetcaseinkinaseIIisalsoobservedinneuronswith independent of the presence or absence of a-synuclein
earlya-synucleininclusionsnotsequesteredbyLBsinpPD inclusions (data not shown). Whether subunits of mito-
(Fig. 1d–f), indicating that increased 

Chunk 15:
eactivitiesarepreservedinneurons
the substantia nigra in advanced stages of PD (Ryu et al. of the substantia nigra pars compacta in stage 3 of Braak,
2008).YetcaseinkinaseIIisalsoobservedinneuronswith independent of the presence or absence of a-synuclein
earlya-synucleininclusionsnotsequesteredbyLBsinpPD inclusions (data not shown). Whether subunits of mito-
(Fig. 1d–f), indicating that increased casein kinase II chondrialcomplex Iare oxidativelydamaged, functionally
expression is associated with increased a-synuclein phos- impaired and misassembled in pPD substantia nigra as
phorylation at early stages of PD-related pathology. Other reported in PD (Keeney et al. 2006) is not known.
activated kinases, the functions of which have not been
clearly identified in PD, have also been reported in asso- Oxidative stress
ciation with LBs. One of them, active p38 (p38-P), is
accumulated in cytoplasmic granules in the vicinity of Reduced glutathione levels are decreased in the substantia
LBs or in association with irregular-shaped or diffuse nigra in pPD and they are considered one of the first
a-synuclein deposits in a percentage of substantia nigra alterationsinthesubstantianigrainPD(Jenneretal.1992;
pars compacta neurons in PD (Ferrer et al. 2001) and in a Jenner1993,1998;Dexteretal.1994;Zeevalketal.2008).
few neurons in pPD at stage 3 (Fig. 1g–i). In addition, Oxidative damage in the substantia nigra is already
nitrated a-synuclein is also found in small granules in present in pPD at stages 2 and 3 of Braak (Dalfo´ et al.
123

---PAGE BREAK---

826 I.Ferreretal.
Fig.1 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- PSer129 in several but not all punctiform, neuritic and cytoplasmic
copy of a-synuclein (green) and a-synuclein PSer129 (red) (a–c), aggregates. Casein kinase II and p38 kinase-P are expressed in the
caseinkinaseII(green)anda-synuclein(red)(d–f),andp38kinase-P cytoplasm of neurons with a-synuclein aggregates. p38-P also co-
(green) and a-synuclein (red)

Chunk 16:
ling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- PSer129 in several but not all punctiform, neuritic and cytoplasmic
copy of a-synuclein (green) and a-synuclein PSer129 (red) (a–c), aggregates. Casein kinase II and p38 kinase-P are expressed in the
caseinkinaseII(green)anda-synuclein(red)(d–f),andp38kinase-P cytoplasm of neurons with a-synuclein aggregates. p38-P also co-
(green) and a-synuclein (red) (g–i) in the substantia nigra pars localizes with synuclein in LBs. j–l Negative controls without
compacta inpPDstage 3.a-Synuclein co-localizeswitha-synuclein primaryantibodies
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 827
Fig.2 Triple-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- LBs in the substantia in pPD. Several punctiform inclusions are
copyofa-synucleininclusionsinthesubstantianigrainpPD.Triple differentially stained with the different anti-a-synuclein antibodies
labelling with antibodies directed to the NAC region (AB9, green), whereasco-localizationofallthreeantibodiesisfoundinLB(white
N-terminal (AB2, red) and C-terminal (AB8, blue) of a-synuclein inthemergeconstruction)
showslightdifferencesinthestainingofa-synucleininclusionsand
2005). This is further documented by increased neuroketal superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) and SOD2 is increased in
(NKT) immunofluorescence in neurons with a-synuclein neuronswitha-synucleininclusions(Fig. 3d–l).Inaddition
deposits and by the presence of NKTs in LBs (Fig. 3a–c). tocytoplasmicincreaseinSOD1andSOD2,theseproteins
Neuroketals are a class of compounds that result from the canalsobesequesteredinLBs(Fig. 3j–l).Itisinterestingto
oxidation of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a membrane have in mind that SOD2 has been reported oxidatively
polyunsaturated fatty acid especially vulnerable to free damagedinPD(Choietal.2005;Dalfo´ etal.2005).Thus,
radical attack, which is present in large amounts in the proteinsproducedtocounteractoxidativestressare,inturn,
brain. Therefore, the presence of neuroketals indicates 

Chunk 17:
).Itisinterestingto
oxidation of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a membrane have in mind that SOD2 has been reported oxidatively
polyunsaturated fatty acid especially vulnerable to free damagedinPD(Choietal.2005;Dalfo´ etal.2005).Thus,
radical attack, which is present in large amounts in the proteinsproducedtocounteractoxidativestressare,inturn,
brain. Therefore, the presence of neuroketals indicates oxidatively damaged andsequestered intoLBs.
oxidation of DHA in substantia nigra dopaminergic neu- In the line evidencing early oxidative damage in the
rons at early stages of PD. substantia nigra in pPD is the observation of lipoxidative
Oxidativestressresponsesarealsoaugmentedinneurons damage of a-synuclein in pPD (Dalfo´ and Ferrer 2008).
witha-synucleinpathology.Expressionofperoxiredoxin2, Therefore, available observations show that oxidative
123

---PAGE BREAK---

828 I.Ferreretal.
Fig.3 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- stage3.Markersofoxidativedamageandmarkersofoxidativestress
copyofneuroketal(green)anda-synuclein(red)(a–c),peroxiredoxin responsesareexpressedinneuronsofthesubstantianigra.Inaddition,
(green) and a-synuclein (red) (d–f), superoxide dismutase 2 (green) neuroketal,SOD1andSOD2,butrarelyperoxiredoxinaccumulatein
anda-synuclein(red)(g–i),andsuperoxidedismutase1(green)and LBs
a-synuclein(red)(j–l)inthesubstantia nigraparscompacta inpPD
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 829
damage is an early event in PD and that oxidative damage micro-dissected neurons, quantitative transcriptase-poly-
inthesubstantianigrainstage2precedestheformationof merase chain reaction (RT-PCR), in situ hybridization and
LBs in pPD substantia nigra. immunohistochemistry with a panel of different specific
Furtherbiochemicalstudieshaveshownincreasedlevels antibodies(Biagiolietal.2009;Richteretal.2009).Nerve
of neuroketals in the substantia nigra in cases with PD- cells also express erythropoietin receptor, erythropoietin
related patholo

Chunk 18:
precedestheformationof merase chain reaction (RT-PCR), in situ hybridization and
LBs in pPD substantia nigra. immunohistochemistry with a panel of different specific
Furtherbiochemicalstudieshaveshownincreasedlevels antibodies(Biagiolietal.2009;Richteretal.2009).Nerve
of neuroketals in the substantia nigra in cases with PD- cells also express erythropoietin receptor, erythropoietin
related pathology stages 1 and 2 (Fig. 4), thus further and hypoxia-inducible factor Hif1a (Matsuda et al. 1994;
supporting that oxidative damage to specific lipids in the Digicaylioglu et al. 1995).
substantia nigra occurs at very early stages of PD before Globinaandbispresentindopaminergicneuronsofthe
the appearance of regional a-synuclein aggregates. These substantianigra,anditsexpressionisreducedinvulnerable
observations indicate early oxidative damage to lipids and neurons in parallel with abnormal a-synuclein deposition
certain proteins. In addition, evidence of DNA damage in (Fig. 5). In contrast, the expression of neuroglobin and
the substantia nigra in pPD is shown in Fig. 4. erythropoietin receptor is preserved in the same cells.
These preliminary data point to the possibility that
Iron decreased globin a and b may play a role in the patho-
genesis of PD.
Iron plays an important role in the regulation of several
enzymatic activities and in redox modulation. Iron dysho- Endoplasmic reticulum stress
meostasis has been observed in PD (Andersen 2004;
Salazaretal.2006;Hirsch2006;BarnhamandBush2008; Accumulation of misfolded proteins can trigger a reticu-
Youdim 2008). Neuromelanin has a protective function lum stress response which is manifested by the activation
under physiological conditions contributing to iron of certain markers such as pancreatic endoplasmic retic-
homeostasis (Double 2006). However, neuromelanin ulum kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a
lipoxidation, altered a-synuclein binding to neuromelanin (eIF2a). Phosphorylated PERK and phosphorylated eIF2a


Chunk 19:
ective function lum stress response which is manifested by the activation
under physiological conditions contributing to iron of certain markers such as pancreatic endoplasmic retic-
homeostasis (Double 2006). However, neuromelanin ulum kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a
lipoxidation, altered a-synuclein binding to neuromelanin (eIF2a). Phosphorylated PERK and phosphorylated eIF2a
and increased levels of L-ferritin in neuromelanin have expression is increased in dopaminergic neurons of the
harmful effects on dopaminergic cell fate (Halliday et al. substantia nigra in advanced stages of PD (Hoozemans
2005; Double and Halliday 2006; Zecca et al. 2006, 2008; etal.2007).IncreasedeIF2aandphosphorylatedeIF2aare
Tribletal.2009).Ironisincreasedinthesubstantianigrain also found in neurons of the substantia nigra pars com-
PD and it is stored in glial cells and macrophages at the pacta, they partly co-localize with a-synuclein inclusions
time that neuromelanin decreases in vulnerable neurons in pPD (Fig. 6). Together, these observations support the
(Gerlach et al. 2006; Fasano et al. 2006). In addition, idea that endoplasmic reticulum stress plays a role in the
increasedironlevelshavebeenfoundinindividualneurons pathogenesis of early stages of PD (Wang and Takahashi
in PD (Oakley et al. 2007). As a result, increased iron 2007).
levels,andparticularly increased levelsoflabileiron, may
increaseiron-mediated oxidativedamageandcontributeto Protein degradation: the ubiquitin–proteasome system
redox imbalance in PD (Wang et al. 2008; Chinta and and autophagy in iPD
Andersen 2008; Wypijewska et al. 2010).
No evidence ofalteration iniron,copper,manganese or LBs and neurites are manifestations of impaired protein
zinc inthe pPD substantia nigrawasnotedinearly studies degradation in vulnerable cells. Since protein degradation
(Jenner et al. 1992). However, recent observations have putatively occurs via cytosolic proteases, chaperone-
shown that L-ferritin concentration 

Chunk 20:
 2008; Wypijewska et al. 2010).
No evidence ofalteration iniron,copper,manganese or LBs and neurites are manifestations of impaired protein
zinc inthe pPD substantia nigrawasnotedinearly studies degradation in vulnerable cells. Since protein degradation
(Jenner et al. 1992). However, recent observations have putatively occurs via cytosolic proteases, chaperone-
shown that L-ferritin concentration in the substantia nigra mediated autophagy (CMA), ubiquitin–proteasome system
is lower in pPD (and PD) when compared with controls, (UPS) and micro-, macroautophagy, all these mechanisms
whereas H-ferritin in PD is higher than in pPD and con- have been analysed in experimental models of PD. How-
trols, thus indicatingfine abnormalities iniron metabolism ever, much less is known about what happens in PD.
in the substantia nigra at early stages of PD (Koziorowski Several in vitro studies have shown impaired UPS
et al. 2007). functioninPD(OlanowandMcNaught2006).Infavourof
impaired UPS function is the cardinal early observation
Neuronal globin a and b chain in the substantia that ubiquitin occurs in Lewy inclusions and that p62
nigra in pPD immunoreactivity appears in association with abnormal
a-synucleininclusionsatearlystagesofLB(Kuusistoetal.
Recent studieshave demonstratedthepresenceofglobina 2003). However, the sequence of events is obscure. Mor-
andbinneuronsinthemouse,ratandhumanbrains,using phological evidence in PD neurons shows fine a-synuclein
robustcombinedmethodsincludingtranscriptomeanalysis deposition in the cytoplasm of selected neurons. Ubiquitin
(cDNA microarrays and nanoCAGE) of laser-captured and p62 decorates some of but not all these inclusions
123

---PAGE BREAK---

830 I.Ferreretal.
Fig.4 aIncreasedneuroketalexpressionintotalhomogenatesofthe immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy to 8-hydroxyguanine
substantia nigra in pPD (iPD) compared with controls (CTL). (8-dOHG)(green)anda-synuclein(red)showsgreenstaininginthe
Accompanying diagram illustrtes sig

Chunk 21:
nanoCAGE) of laser-captured and p62 decorates some of but not all these inclusions
123

---PAGE BREAK---

830 I.Ferreretal.
Fig.4 aIncreasedneuroketalexpressionintotalhomogenatesofthe immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy to 8-hydroxyguanine
substantia nigra in pPD (iPD) compared with controls (CTL). (8-dOHG)(green)anda-synuclein(red)showsgreenstaininginthe
Accompanying diagram illustrtes significant differences P\0.001 nuclei of several glial cels but not in neurons with a-synuclein
(Student’s t test). b Increased oxidative damage to nucleic acids of inclusions.Nuclei(blue)arestainedwithTO-PRO
glialcellsinthesubstantianigraofpPDatstage3.Double-labelling
suggestingthatabnormalsynucleindepositionisafirststep observations in cell models (Stefanis et al. 2001; Cuervo
followed by ubiquitination of a-synuclein and association et al. 2004; Engelender 2008; Mart´ınez-Vicente et al.
of p62 to polyubiquitinated proteins (Kuusisto et al. 2003; 2008; Xilouri et al. 2008, Vogiatzi et al. 2008; Mak et al.
Nakaso et al. 2004). More recent observations have pro- 2010). Little is known, however, about the role of
vided evidence of altered expression of components of the autophagy in human PD. Several morphological studies
UPS in PD (Chu et al. 2009). Moreover, some of them have shown that neuromelanin in the substantia nigra is
appeartobemodifiedbyoxidationthusresultinginlostof associated with the autophagosome/lysosome system
function (Choi et al. 2004; Chung et al. 2004; see later). (Anglade et al. 1997; Tribl et al. 2006) thus providing a
Therefore, altered degradation by the UPS of abnormal possible subtle link between a-synuclein and lysosomes in
a-synuclein and several hundred proteins associated with the substantia nigra under normal conditions and in PD.
LBs does probably depend on multiple factors (Shamoto- Certain autophagy markers are altered in the substantia
Nagai et al. 2007; Chu et al. 2009). nigra in PD (Pan et al. 2008). More straightforward in
The role of aut

Chunk 22:
f abnormal possible subtle link between a-synuclein and lysosomes in
a-synuclein and several hundred proteins associated with the substantia nigra under normal conditions and in PD.
LBs does probably depend on multiple factors (Shamoto- Certain autophagy markers are altered in the substantia
Nagai et al. 2007; Chu et al. 2009). nigra in PD (Pan et al. 2008). More straightforward in
The role of autophagy, including CMA and macro- the present context is the observation that the expression
autophagy in PD, is postulated mainly on the basis of and localization of proteins linked with autophagy and
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 831
Fig.5 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- a-synuclein inclusions (compare a–c with d–f). Similarly, globin
copy of ferritin (green) and a-synuclein (red) (a–f), a-synuclein a-chainexpressionisreducedinneuronswitha-synucleininclusions
(green) and globin a-chain (red) (G-L) in the substantia nigra pars (compareg–iwithj–l)
compacta in pPD stage 3. Ferritin is decreased in neurons with
123

---PAGE BREAK---

832 I.Ferreretal.
Fig.6 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- stage 3. eif2a co-localizes with a-synuclein inclusions (a–f). The
copyofeif2a(green)anda-synuclein(red)(a–f),andeif2a(green) majorityofeif2aisphosphorylated(g–l)thussuggestingactivationof
andeif2a-P(red)(g–l)inthesubstantianigraparscompactainpPD thereticulumstressresponses
lysosomes as microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain (Fig. 7). In the same line, recent findings suggest that
3 alpha (LC3), lysosomal-associated protein 1 (LAMP1) CMA activity is reduced in PD brain (Alvarez-Erviti et al.
and LAMP2 (Klionsky et al. 2008) are altered in pPD 2010).
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 833
Fig.7 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- and a-synuclein (red) (g–h) in substantia nigra pars compacta in
copy of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha (L

Chunk 23:
ated protein 1 (LAMP1) CMA activity is reduced in PD brain (Alvarez-Erviti et al.
and LAMP2 (Klionsky et al. 2008) are altered in pPD 2010).
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 833
Fig.7 Double-labelling immunofluorescence and confocal micros- and a-synuclein (red) (g–h) in substantia nigra pars compacta in
copy of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha (LC3) pPDstage3.Markersofautophagyareexpressedinassociationwith
(green) and a-synuclein (red) (a–c), lysosomal associated protein 2 a-synuclein aggregates. j–l Negative controls processed without
(LAMP2) (green) and a-synuclein (red) (d–f), LAMP1 (green) primaryantibodies
In summary, experiments in vitro strongly support the but precise information about the amount of a-synuclein
ideaofalteredUPSandautophagosome/lysosomefunction cleared by the UPS and the CMA systems is notknown in
in models of altered a-synuclein turnover and clearance, human disease.
123

---PAGE BREAK---

834 I.Ferreretal.
The basal ganglia in pPD (Varani et al. 2010). Recently, we have seen increased
A R expression levels in the caudate in cases with pPD
2A
Evenintheabsenceofmotorsymptoms,lossofneuronsin stage 3 of Braak, thus indicating that this is an early
the substantia nigra translates into loss of dopaminergic abnormality ofthe denervated striatum (Buira et al. 2010).
innervation and consequent remodelling of the putamen. Finally, early and pre-symptomatic stages of PD are
This is clearly illustrated by the loss of tyrosine hydroxy- associated with desensitization/downregulation of type 1
lase (TH) immunoreactivity and loss of vesicular mono- cannabinoid(CB1) receptors,whereasadvancedstages are
aminetransporter2(VMAT2)intheputameninpPD,with characterized by up-regulatoryresponses of CB1 receptors
values that are intermediate between those in normal (Garc´ıa-Arencibia et al. 2009). Whether down-regulation
individuals and in parkinsonian stages of PD (DelleDonne ofCB1receptorsatearlystagesispathogenic

Chunk 24:
activity and loss of vesicular mono- cannabinoid(CB1) receptors,whereasadvancedstages are
aminetransporter2(VMAT2)intheputameninpPD,with characterized by up-regulatoryresponses of CB1 receptors
values that are intermediate between those in normal (Garc´ıa-Arencibia et al. 2009). Whether down-regulation
individuals and in parkinsonian stages of PD (DelleDonne ofCB1receptorsatearlystagesispathogenicremainstobe
et al. 2008; Dickson et al. 2008) (Fig. 8). These morpho- elucidated;thismayconstituteanimportantputativetarget
logical aspects are also sustained by observations using for therapeutic intervention. Decreased CB1 receptor
serial metabolic imaging with [(18)F]-fluorodeoxyglucose expressionisalsoobservedinthecaudateinpPD,showing
positron emission tomography (PET) in sporadic cases that this is a very early alteration in the course of PD
(Tang et al. 2010). Multitracer PET scans are, therefore, (Fig. 8).
usefultoolstounveildopaminergicdysfunctioninpatients
with suspected pPD.
The balance of other molecules is also modified in the The olfactory bulb and tract in pPD
striatum in pPD. Leu-encephalin levels are reduced in the
putamenandundetectableinthesubstantianigrainPD,but In the present series, the morphological study of the
Leu-encephalin levels are only barely reduced in the olfactory bulb and tract revealed the presence of small
putamen in pPD (Fernandez et al. 1996). numbers of neurons and neurites bearing a-synuclein
Adenosine receptors 2A (A Rs) in the striatum are aggregates which are also recognized with antibodies
2A
practically restricted to GABAergic neurons projecting against nitrated a-synuclein and against phospho-specific
from the caudate and putamen to the external globus pal- a-synucleinSer129antibodies(Fig. 9).However,itishard
lidus, which also expresses dopamine D receptors (D Rs) toassumethatsuchasmallnumberofstructuralanomalies
2 2
(Fuxeetal.2007).A Rsexpressionlevelsinthestriatum may account for the sophisticated olfactory deficits that
2A
are

Chunk 25:
jecting against nitrated a-synuclein and against phospho-specific
from the caudate and putamen to the external globus pal- a-synucleinSer129antibodies(Fig. 9).However,itishard
lidus, which also expresses dopamine D receptors (D Rs) toassumethatsuchasmallnumberofstructuralanomalies
2 2
(Fuxeetal.2007).A Rsexpressionlevelsinthestriatum may account for the sophisticated olfactory deficits that
2A
are increased in PD and correlate with motor symptoms include not only loss of olfaction but also altered dis-
crimination of odours with increased perception in some
circumstances. It may be hypothesized that, as in other
regions, olfactory alterations in pPD and PD are the result
of more complicated settings resulting from several
molecular deficits.
The cerebral cortex in pPD
Altered behaviour, apathy and depression may occur in
patients with pPD (Poewe 2008; McKinlay et al. 2009;
Pedersen et al. 2009). The molecular substrates of such
alterationsarescarcelyknownbutpiecesofknowledgeare
rapidly growing (Ferrer 2009a).
BraincortexandmitochondrialO uptakeandcomplexI
2
activity are significantly lower in PD, whereas mtNOS
activity, cytochrome content, expression of SOD2, mito-
chondrial mass, and oxidative damage are significantly
higher in the frontal cortex in PD. The decreases in tissue
and mitochondrial O uptake and in complex I activity are
2
considered the consequences of mitochondrial oxidative
Fig.8 Expression levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and cannab- damage in the cerebral cortex inPD (Navarroet al. 2009).
inoid 1 receptor (CB-1 receptor) in the caudate nucleus in controls
Unfortunately, no similar data are available in pPD.
andinpPD(iPDBraak3).ReducedexpressionofTH(62kDa)and
Recent observations have shown abnormal lipid com-
CB-1receptor(52kDa)isobservedindiseasedcaseswhencompared
withcontrols(P\0.01,Student’sttest) position in the frontal cortex in pPD which is manifested
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 835
Fig.9 Images of the ol

Chunk 26:
ls
Unfortunately, no similar data are available in pPD.
andinpPD(iPDBraak3).ReducedexpressionofTH(62kDa)and
Recent observations have shown abnormal lipid com-
CB-1receptor(52kDa)isobservedindiseasedcaseswhencompared
withcontrols(P\0.01,Student’sttest) position in the frontal cortex in pPD which is manifested
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 835
Fig.9 Images of the olfactory bulb at stages 2 and 3 of Braak. Scattered neurites and cell bodies are immunoreactive with anti-a-synuclein
antibodies.Paraffinsectionsslightlycounterstainedwithhaematoxylin
with significantlyincreasedexpression levelsofthe highly including pharmacological and neurosurgical therapeutic
peroxidizable DHA and increased peroxidability index interventions geared to balancing dopamine deficits and
(Dalfo´ etal.2005).Moredramatically,severalkeyproteins related neurotransmitters and modulators in the nigrostri-
are targets of oxidative damage in the frontal cortex, as atal system. However, PD is a systemic disease affecting
revealed by bi-dimensional gel electrophoresis, redox several distinct neuronal populations of the central and
proteomics and mass spectrometry, in pPD including peripheral nervous system, with the appearance of motor
a-synuclein, b-synuclein and SOD2 (Dalfo´ et al. 2005; symptomsinasubstantialnumberofpatientsasthetopofa
Dalfo´ and Ferrer 2008). In addition, increased oxidative plethora of non-motor signs and symptoms affecting the
damage of aldolase A, enolase 1 and glyceraldehyde heart, gastrointestinal tract, olfaction, sleep and mental
dehydrogenase (GAPDH), all of them involved in glycol- functions.Moreover,neuropathologicalandclinicalstudies
ysis and energy metabolism, is found in the frontal cortex have shown only a partial correlation between regional
in pPD (and PD as well) (Go´mez and Ferrer 2009). Other a-synuclein inclusions and corresponding neurological
oxidatively damaged proteins are phosphoprotein enriched deficits at early stages of t

Chunk 27:
), all of them involved in glycol- functions.Moreover,neuropathologicalandclinicalstudies
ysis and energy metabolism, is found in the frontal cortex have shown only a partial correlation between regional
in pPD (and PD as well) (Go´mez and Ferrer 2009). Other a-synuclein inclusions and corresponding neurological
oxidatively damaged proteins are phosphoprotein enriched deficits at early stages of the disease, and no clear relation
in astrocytes 15, SH3 domain binding glutamic acid-rich between LBs, and motor and cognitive impairment.
protein like, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2N-like, pro- Cumulative evidence in recent years indicates that mito-
hibitin, proteasome subunit Y and thioredoxin. Finally, chondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and oxidative
cortical synapses are abnormal in pPD (and PD), as tau damagetocrucialproteins,post-translationalmodifications
phosphorylation and a-synuclein phosphorylation are of proteins, and endoplasmic reticulum stress converge in
increased in synaptic-enriched fractions of frontal cortex the pathogenesis of PD. This is further supported by pro-
homogenates (Muntane´ et al. 2008). teomic studies showing dysregulation of proteins involved
inenergymetabolism,oxidativestress,signaltransduction,
electron transport and detoxification pathways in PD
Concluding comments (Srivastava et al. 2010). Furthermore, the use of redox
proteomics has revealed that protein altered by oxidative
Until recently, PD was considered to be a movement dis- damagemayhaveanimpactonproteinfunctioninspiteof
ease mainly characterized by the loss of dopaminergic apparently normal total levels of the protein (Mart´ınez
neuronsandoccurrenceofLBsintheremainingcellsinthe et al. 2010). Importantly, some of these changes occur at
substantia nigra. This point of view has served to drive very early stages of PD-related pathology in areas with no
major advances in the treatment of patients with PD, accompanyingLewy-likeinclusions,suchasthesubstantia
123

---PAGE BREAK

Chunk 28:
rently normal total levels of the protein (Mart´ınez
neuronsandoccurrenceofLBsintheremainingcellsinthe et al. 2010). Importantly, some of these changes occur at
substantia nigra. This point of view has served to drive very early stages of PD-related pathology in areas with no
major advances in the treatment of patients with PD, accompanyingLewy-likeinclusions,suchasthesubstantia
123

---PAGE BREAK---

836 I.Ferreretal.
nigrainstage2,andthestriatumandcerebralfrontalcortex Biagioli M, Pinto M, Cesselli D, Zaninello M, Lazarevic D,
in stages 2 and 3 of Braak. Furthermore, although still Roncaglia P, Simone R, Vlachouli C, Plessy C, Bertin N,
BeltramiA,KobayashiK,GalloV,SantoroC,FerrerI,Rivella
patchy,severalpiecesofinformationsuggestthatfailurein
S, Beltrami CA, Carninci P, Raviola E, Gustincich S (2009)
energymetabolismmayhaveanadditivedeleteriouseffect Unexpected expression of alpha- and beta-globin in mesence-
on neuronal function. The term ‘exhausted neuron’ was phalic dopaminergic neurons and glial cells. Proc Natl Acad
appliedinthecontextofAlzheimerdiseasetodescribethe Sci 106:15454–15459
Bloch A, Probst A, Bissing H, Adams H, Tolnay M (2006) Alpha-
particular situation of neurons working under suboptimal
synuclein pathology of the spinal and peripheral autonomic
conditions of reduced energy production, increased energy nervous system in neurologically unimpaired elderly subjects.
demands and oxidative damage (Ferrer 2009b). This term NeuropatholApplNeurobiol32:284–295
canalsobeappliedtopPDandPDinwhichneuronssuffer BraakH,delTrediciK(2008)Cortico-basalganglia-corticalcircuitry
inParkinson’sdiseasereconsidered.ExpNeurol212:226–229
from a convergence of intrinsic and external deficiencies
BraakH,Sandmann-KeilD,GaiW,BraakE(1999)Extensiveaxonal
that may impair neuronal function and eventually result in Lewy neurites in Parkinson’s disease: a novel pathological
celldeath.Recognitionofthisscenariohelpsusunderstand feature revealed by alpha-synuclein immunocytochemistry

Chunk 29:
cuitry
inParkinson’sdiseasereconsidered.ExpNeurol212:226–229
from a convergence of intrinsic and external deficiencies
BraakH,Sandmann-KeilD,GaiW,BraakE(1999)Extensiveaxonal
that may impair neuronal function and eventually result in Lewy neurites in Parkinson’s disease: a novel pathological
celldeath.Recognitionofthisscenariohelpsusunderstand feature revealed by alpha-synuclein immunocytochemistry.
day-to-day variations in neurological deficits, fluctuations, NeurosciLett265:67–69
Braak H, del Tredici K, Bratzke H, Hamm-Clement J, Sandemann-
apparenttransientrecoveriesandsubtleminingofneuronal
KeilD,RubU(2002)Stagingoftheintracerebralinclusionbody
integrity in neurodegenerative disease. More importantly, pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (pre-
many of these alterations may be targets of therapeutic clinicalandclinicalstages).JNeurol249(suppl3):1–5
intervention geared to delaying disease progression. Braak H, del Tredici K, Ru¨b U, de Vos RAI, Jansen Steur ENH,
Braak E (2003) Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic
Parkinson’sdisease.NeurobiolAging24:197–211
Acknowledgments Work carried out in the Institute of Neuropa-
BraakH,GhebremedhinE,Ru¨bU,BratzkeH,delTrediciK(2004)
thologywaspartiallyfundedbygrantsfromtheSpanishMinistryof
Stages in the development of Parkinson’s disease-related
Health,InstitutodeSaludCarlosIIIPI05/1570,PI05/2214andPI08/
pathology.CellTissueRes318:121–134
0582,andsupportedbytheEuropeanCommission:BrainNetEurope
BraakH,Ru¨bU,JansenSteurEN,delTrediciK,deVosRA(2005)
II, LSHM-CT-2004-503039 and INDABIP FP6-2005-LIFESCI-
CognitivestatuscorrelateswithneuropathologicstateinParkin-
HEALTH-7 Molecular Diagnostics. Thanks to T. Yohannan for
sondisease.Neurology64:1404–1410
editorialhelp.
BraakH,MullerCM,Ru¨bU,AckermannH,BratzkeH,deVosRA,
del Tredici K (2006) Pathology associated with sporadic
Parkinson’sdisease:wheredoesitend?JNeuralTransmSuppl
70:89–97
References Buira SP, Dentesano G, Albasanz JL, Moreno J, Juve´s S, Mart´ı

Chunk 30:
vestatuscorrelateswithneuropathologicstateinParkin-
HEALTH-7 Molecular Diagnostics. Thanks to T. Yohannan for
sondisease.Neurology64:1404–1410
editorialhelp.
BraakH,MullerCM,Ru¨bU,AckermannH,BratzkeH,deVosRA,
del Tredici K (2006) Pathology associated with sporadic
Parkinson’sdisease:wheredoesitend?JNeuralTransmSuppl
70:89–97
References Buira SP, Dentesano G, Albasanz JL, Moreno J, Juve´s S, Mart´ın M,
FerrerI,BarrachinaM(2010)Increasedstriatalyingyang-1levels
Alvarez-Erviti L, Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Cooper JM, Caballero C, inParkinson‘sdisease:apotentialnegativeregulatorofadenosine
FerrerI, Obeso JA,Schapira AHV (2010)Chaperone-mediated A receptorexpressionlevels.JNeurochem112:1273–1285
2a
autophagy markers are abnormal in Parkinson’s disease brain. Chaudhuri KR, Yates L, Mart´ınez-Mart´ın P (2005) The non-motor
ArchNeurol[Epubaheadofprint] symptom complex of Parkinson’s disease: a comprehensive
Andersen JK (2004) Iron dysregulation and Parkinson’s disease. assessmentisessential.CurrNeurolNeurosciRep5:275–283
JAlzheimersDis6:S47–S52 Chiba-Falek O, Lopez GJ, Nussbaum RL (2006) Levels of alpha-
Anderson JP, Walker DE, Goldstein JM, Laat R, Banducci K, synuclein mRNA in sporadic Parkinson disease patients. Mov
Caccavello RJ, Barbour R, Huang J, Kling K, Lee M, Diep L, Disord21:1703–1708
KeimPS,ShenX,ChartawayT,SchlossmacherMG,SeubertP, Chinta SJ, Andersen JK (2008) Redox imbalance in Parkinson’s
SchenkD,SinhaS,GaiWP,ChilcoteTJ(2006)Phosphorylation disease.BiochemBiophysActa1780:1362–1367
of Ser 129 is the dominant pathological modification of ChoiJ,LeveyAI,WeintraubST,ReesHD,GearingM,ChinLS,LiL
synuclein in familial and sporadic Lewy body disease. J Biol (2004)Oxidativemodificationsanddown-regulationofubiquitin
Chem281:29739–29759 carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 associated with idiopathic
AngladeP,VyasS,Javoy-AgidF,HerreroMT,MichelPP,Marquez Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. J Biol Chem 279:
J, Mouatt-Prigent A, Ruberg M, Hirsch EC, Agid Y (1997) 13256–13264
Apoptosis a

Chunk 31:
ngM,ChinLS,LiL
synuclein in familial and sporadic Lewy body disease. J Biol (2004)Oxidativemodificationsanddown-regulationofubiquitin
Chem281:29739–29759 carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 associated with idiopathic
AngladeP,VyasS,Javoy-AgidF,HerreroMT,MichelPP,Marquez Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. J Biol Chem 279:
J, Mouatt-Prigent A, Ruberg M, Hirsch EC, Agid Y (1997) 13256–13264
Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of patients with Choi J, Rees HD, Weintraub ST, Levey AI, Chin LS, Li L (2005)
Parkinson’sdisease.HistolHistopathol12:25–31 Oxidative modifications and aggregation of Cu, Zn-superoxide
Baba M, Nakajo S, Tu PH, Tomita T, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, dismutase associated with Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases.
IwatsuboT(1998)Aggregationofa-synucleininLewybodiesof JBiolChem280:11648–11655
sporadic Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Chu Y, Dodiya H, Aebischer P, Olanow CW, Kordower JH (2009)
AmJPathol152:879–884 AlterationsinlysosomalandproteasomalmarkersinParkinson’s
BarnhamKJ,BushAI(2008)MetalsinAlzheimer’sandParkinson’s disease: relationship to alpha-synuclein inclusions. Neurobiol
diseases.CurrOpinChemBiol12:222–228 Dis35:385–398
BeachTG,AdlerCH,LueL,SueLI,BachalakuriJ,Henry-WatsonJ, Chung KK, Thomas B, Li X, Pletnikova O, Troncoso JC, Marsh L,
SasseJ,BoyerS,ShirohiS,BrooksR,EschbacherJ,WhiteCL Dawson VL, Dawson TM (2004) S-Nitrosylation of parkin
3rd,AkiyamaH,CavinessJ,ShillHA,ConnorDJ,SabbaghMN, regulates ubiquitination and compromises Parkin’s protective
Walker DG, Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium (2009) function.Science304:1328–1331
UnifiedstagingsystemforLewybodydisorders:correlationwith CuervoAM,StefanisL,FredenburgR,LansburyPT,SulzerD(2004)
nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-
dysfunction.ActaNeuropathol117:613–634 mediatedautophagy.Science305:1292–1295
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 837
Dalfo´ E,FerrerI(20

Chunk 32:
1
UnifiedstagingsystemforLewybodydisorders:correlationwith CuervoAM,StefanisL,FredenburgR,LansburyPT,SulzerD(2004)
nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-
dysfunction.ActaNeuropathol117:613–634 mediatedautophagy.Science305:1292–1295
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 837
Dalfo´ E,FerrerI(2008)Earlya-synucleinlipoxidationinneocortex FornoLS(1996)NeuropathologyofParkinson’sdisease.JNeuropa-
inLewybodydiseases.NeurobiolAging29:408–417 tholExpNeurol55:259–272
Dalfo´ E, Barrachina M, Rosa JL, Ambrosio S, Ferrer I (2004) Frigerio R, Fujishiro H, Maraganore DM, Klos KJ, DelleDonne A,
Abnormal a-synuclein interactions with rab3a and rabphilin in Heckman MG, Crook JE, Josephs KA, Parisi JE, Boeve BF,
diffuseLewybodydisease.NeurobiolDis16:92–97 Dickson DW, Ahlskog JE (2009) Comparison of risk factor
Dalfo´ E,Portero-Ot´ınM,AyalaV,Mart´ınezA,PamplonaR,FerrerI profilesinincidentalLewybodydiseaseandParkinsondisease.
(2005)Evidenceofoxidativestressintheneocortexinincidental ArchNeurol66:1114–1119
Lewybodydisease.JNeuropatholExpNeurol64:1–13 Fujiwara H, Hasegawa M, Dohmae N, Kawashima A, Masliah E,
DanielSE,HawkesCH(1992)PreliminarydiagnosisofParkinson’s GoldbergMS,ShenJ,TakioK,IwatsuboT(2002)a-synucleinis
diseasebyolfactorybulbpathology.Lancet340:186 phosphorylated in synucleinopathy lesions. Nat Cell Biol
DelTrediciK,Ru¨bU,DeVosRA,BohlJR,BraakH(2002)Where 4:160–164
does Parkinson disease pathology begin in the brain? J Neuro- Fuxe K, Marcellino D, Genedani S, Agnati L (2007) Adenosine
patholExpNeurol61:413–426 A(2A)receptors,dopamineD(2)receptorsandtheirinteractions
DelleDonne A, Klos KJ, Fujishiro H, Ahmed Z, Parisi JE, Josephs inParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord22:1990–2017
KA, Frigerio R, BurnettM, Wszolek ZK,UitiRJ, AhlskogJE, Garc´ıa-Arencibia M, Garc´ıa C, Ferna´ndez-Ruiz J (2009) Cannabi-
DicksonDW(2008)IncidentalLewybodydiseaseandpreclin- noidsandParkinson’sdisease.CNS

Chunk 33:
osine
patholExpNeurol61:413–426 A(2A)receptors,dopamineD(2)receptorsandtheirinteractions
DelleDonne A, Klos KJ, Fujishiro H, Ahmed Z, Parisi JE, Josephs inParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord22:1990–2017
KA, Frigerio R, BurnettM, Wszolek ZK,UitiRJ, AhlskogJE, Garc´ıa-Arencibia M, Garc´ıa C, Ferna´ndez-Ruiz J (2009) Cannabi-
DicksonDW(2008)IncidentalLewybodydiseaseandpreclin- noidsandParkinson’sdisease.CNSNeurolDisordDrugTargets
icalParkinsondisease.ArchNeurol65:1074–1080 8:432–439
Dexter DT, Sian J, Rose S, Hindmarsh JG, Mann VM, Cooper JM, Gerlach M, Double KL, Youdim MB, Riederer P (2006) Potential
Wells FR, Daniel SE, Lees AJ, Schapira AH (1994) Indices of sourcesofincreasedironinthesubstantianigraofparkinsonian
oxidative stress and mitochondrial function in individuals with patients.JNeuralTransmSuppl70:133–142
incidentalLewybodydisease.AnnNeurol35:38–44 Giasson BI, Duda JE, Murray IV, Chen Q, Souza JM, Hurtig HI,
Dickson DW (2001) Alpha-synuclein and the Lewy body disorders. Ischiropuolos H, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VMY (2000) Oxidative
CurrOpinNeurol14:423–432 damage linked to neurodegeneration by selective a-synuclein
DicksonDW,FujishiroH,DelleDonneA,MenkeJ,AhmedZ,KlosKJ, nitrationinsynucleinopathylesions.Science290:985–989
JosephsKA,FrigerioR,BurnettM,ParisiJE,AhlskogJE(2008) GoedertM(2001)Parkinson’sdiseaseandothera-synucleinopathies.
Evidence that incidental Lewy body disease is pre-symptomatic ClinChemLabMed39:308–312
Parkinson’sdisease.ActaNeuropathol115:437–444 Go´mez A, Ferrer I (2009) Increased oxidation of certain glycolysis
DicksonDW,UchikadoH,FujishiroH,TsuboiY(2010)Evidencein and energy metabolism enzymes in the frontal cortex in Lewy
favor of Braak staging of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord bodydiseases.JNeurosciRes87:1002–1013
25(Suppl1):S78–S82 Halliday GM, Ophof A, Broe M, Jensen PH, Kettle E, Fedorow H,
DigicayliogluM,BichetS,MartiHH,WengerRH,RivasLA,Bauer Cartwright MI, Griffiths FM, Shepherd CE, Double KL (2005)
C, Gassmann M (1995) Localization of spec

Chunk 34:
idencein and energy metabolism enzymes in the frontal cortex in Lewy
favor of Braak staging of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord bodydiseases.JNeurosciRes87:1002–1013
25(Suppl1):S78–S82 Halliday GM, Ophof A, Broe M, Jensen PH, Kettle E, Fedorow H,
DigicayliogluM,BichetS,MartiHH,WengerRH,RivasLA,Bauer Cartwright MI, Griffiths FM, Shepherd CE, Double KL (2005)
C, Gassmann M (1995) Localization of specific erythropoietin Alpha-synuclein redistributes to neuromelanin lipid in the
bindingsitesindefinedareasofthehumanbrain.ProcNatlAcad substantia nigra early in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 128:2654–
SciUSA93:3717–3720 2664
DoubleKL(2006)Functionaleffectsofneuromelaninandsynthetic Hashimoto M, Masliah E (1999) a-synuclein in Lewy body disease
melanininmodelsystems.JNeuarlTransm113:751–756 andAlzheimer’sdisease.BrainPathol9:707–720
DoubleKL,HallidayGM(2006)Newfaceofneuromelanin.JNeural HertingB,SchulzeS,ReichmannH,HaehnerA,HummelT(2008)A
TransmSuppl70:119–123 longitudinal study of olfactory function in patients with
Duda JE, Giasson BI, Chen Q, Gur TL, Hurtig HI, Stern MB, idiopathicParkinson’sdisease.JNeurol255:367–370
GollompSM,IschiropoulosH,LeeVM,TrojanowskiJQ(2000) HirschEC(2006)Alteredregulationofirontransportandstoragein
Widespread nitration of pathological inclusions in neurodegen- Parkinson’sdisease.JNeuralTransmSuppl71:201–204
erativesynucleinopathies.AmJPathol157:1439–1445 Hoozemans JJ, van Haastert ES, Eikelenboom P, de Vos RA,
EChWolters,BraakH(2006)Parkinson’sdisease:pre-motorclinico- Rozemuller JM, Scheper W (2007) Activation of the unfolded
pathologicalcorrelations.JNeuralTransmSuppl70:309–319 protein response in Parkinson’s disease. Biochem Biophys Res
Engelender S (2008) Ubiquitination of alpha synuynucelin and Commun354:707–711
autophagyinParkinson’sdisease.Autophagy4:372–374 Hubbard PS, Esiri MM, Reading M, McShane R, Nagy Z (2007)
Fasano M, Bergamasco B, Lopiano L (2006) Modifications of the a-synuclein pathology in the olfactory pathways of dementia
iron-n

Chunk 35:
ralTransmSuppl70:309–319 protein response in Parkinson’s disease. Biochem Biophys Res
Engelender S (2008) Ubiquitination of alpha synuynucelin and Commun354:707–711
autophagyinParkinson’sdisease.Autophagy4:372–374 Hubbard PS, Esiri MM, Reading M, McShane R, Nagy Z (2007)
Fasano M, Bergamasco B, Lopiano L (2006) Modifications of the a-synuclein pathology in the olfactory pathways of dementia
iron-neuromelanin system in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem patients.JAnat211:117–124
96:909–916 Iranzo A, Molinuevo JL, Santamaria J, Serradell M, Marti MJ,
FernandezA,deCeballosML,RoseS,JennerP,MarsdenCD(1996) Vallderiola F, Tolosa E (2006) Rapid-eye-movement sleep
AlterationsinpeptidelevelsinParkinson’sdiseaseandinciden- behaviour disorder as an early marker for a neurodegenerative
talLewybodydisease.Brain119:823–830 disorder:adescriptivestudy.LancetNeurol5:572–577
Ferrer I (2009a) Early involvement of the cerebral cortex in IshiiA,NonakaT,TaniguchiS,SaitoT,AraiT,MannD,IwatsuboT,
Parkinson’sdisease:convergenceofmultiplemetabolicdefects. HisanagaS,GoedertM,HasegawaM(2007)Caseinkinase2is
ProgrNeurobiol88:89–103 themajorenzymeinbrainthatphosphorylatesSer129ofhuman
Ferrer I (2009b) Altered mitochondria, energy metabolism, voltage- alpha-synuclein:implicationforalpha-synucleinopathies. FEBS
dependent anion channel, and lipid rafts converge to exhaust Lett581:4711–4717
neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. J Bioenerg Biomembr Iwanaga K, Wakabayashi K, Yoshimoto M, Tomita I, Satoh H,
41:425–431 TakashimaH,SatohM,TsujiharaM,TakahashiH(1999)Lewy
Ferrer I, Blanco R, Carmona M, Puig B, Barrachina M, Go´mez C, body-type degeneration in cardiac plexus in Parkinson’s and
AmbrosioS(2001)Active,phosphorylation-dependentmitogen- incidentalLewybodydisease.Neurology52:1269–1271
activated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK), stress-activated protein JellingerKA(2004)Lewybody-relatedsynucleinopathyintheaged
kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK), and p38 kinase humanbrain.JNeuralTransm111:1219–1235
expression

Chunk 36:
Go´mez C, body-type degeneration in cardiac plexus in Parkinson’s and
AmbrosioS(2001)Active,phosphorylation-dependentmitogen- incidentalLewybodydisease.Neurology52:1269–1271
activated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK), stress-activated protein JellingerKA(2004)Lewybody-relatedsynucleinopathyintheaged
kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK), and p38 kinase humanbrain.JNeuralTransm111:1219–1235
expression in Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy JellingerKA(2008)AcriticalreappraisalofcurrentstagingofLewy-
bodies.JNeuralTransm108:1383–1396 relatedpathologyinhumanbrain.ActaNeuropathol116:1–16
123

---PAGE BREAK---

838 I.Ferreretal.
JellingerKA(2009)Acriticalevaluationofcurrentstagingofalpha- McKinlay A, Grace RC, Dalrymple-Alford JC, Roger D (2009)
synuclein pathology in Lewy bodydisorders. Biochim Biophys Cognitivecharacteristicsassociatedwithmildcognitiveimpair-
Acta1792:730–740 ment in Parkinson’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord
JellingerKA(2010)Prevalenceandimpactofcerebrovascularlesions 28:121–129
in Alzheimer and Lewy body diseases. Neurodegener Dis MizunoY,OhtaS,TanakaM,TakamiyaS,SuzukiK,SatoT,OyaH,
7:112–115 OzawaT,KagawaY(1989)DeficienciesincomplexIsubunits
JellingerK,MizunoY(2003)Parkinson’sdisease.In:DicksonD(ed) oftherespiratorychaininParkinson’sdisease.BiochemBiophys
Neurodegeneration: the molecular pathology of dementia and ResCommun163:1450–1455
movementdisorders.ISNNeuropatholPress,Bassel,pp159–187 Muntane´ G,FerrerI, Mart´ınez-VicenteMa-Synucleinphosphoryla-
JennerP(1993)Alteredmitochondrialfunction,ironmetabolismand tion and lysosomal-mediated a-synuclein truncation are normal
glutathione levels in Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neurol Scand eventsintheadulthumanbrain(inpreparation)
Suppl146:6–13 Muntane´G,Dalfo´ E,MartinezA,FerrerI(2008)Phosphorylationof
Jenner P (1998) Oxidative mechanisms in nigral cell death in tau and alpha-synuclein in synaptic-enriched fractions of the
Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisord13:24–34 frontalcortexinAlzheimer’sdisease,andinPa

Chunk 37:
truncation are normal
glutathione levels in Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neurol Scand eventsintheadulthumanbrain(inpreparation)
Suppl146:6–13 Muntane´G,Dalfo´ E,MartinezA,FerrerI(2008)Phosphorylationof
Jenner P (1998) Oxidative mechanisms in nigral cell death in tau and alpha-synuclein in synaptic-enriched fractions of the
Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisord13:24–34 frontalcortexinAlzheimer’sdisease,andinParkinson’sdisease
Jenner P, Dexter DT, Sian J, Schapira AH, Marsden CD (1992) andrelateda-synucleinopathies.Neuroscience152:913–923
Oxidative stress as a cause of nigral cell death in Parkinson’s Murray IV, Giasson BI, Quinn SM, Koppaka V, Axelsen PH,
diseaseandincidentalLewybodydisease.TheRoyalKingsand IschiropoulosH,TrojanowskiJQ,LeeVM(2003)Roleofalpha-
Queens Parkinson’s Disease Research Group. Ann Neurol synuclein carboxy-terminus on fibril formation in vitro. Bio-
32:S82–S87 chemistry42:8530–8540
Keeney PM, Xie J, Capaldi RA, Bennett JP (2006) Parkinson’s NakasoK,YoshimotoY,NakanoT,TakeshimaT,FukuharaY,Yasui
diseasebrainmitochondrialcomplexIhasoxidativelydamaged K, Araga S, Yanagawa T, Ishii T, Nakashima K (2004)
subunits and is functionally impaired and misassembled. Transcriptionalactivationofp62/A170/ZIPduringtheformation
JNeurosci26:5256–5264 of the aggregates: possible mechanisms and the role in Lewy
Kingsbury AE, Daniel SE, Sangha H, Eisen S, Lees AJ, Foster OJ bodyformationinParkinson’sdisease.BrainRes1012:42–51
(2004) Alteration in alpha-synuclein mRNA expression in Natale G, Pasquali L, Riuggieri S, Paparelli A, Fornai F (2008)
Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisord19:162–170 Parkinson’s disease and the gut: a well known clinical associ-
Klionsky DJ, Abeliovich H, Agostinis P, Agrawal DK, Aliev G, ation in need of an effective cure and explanation. Neurogas-
AskewDSetal(2008)Guidelinesfortheuseandinterpretation troenterolMotil20:741–749
of assays for monitoring autophagy in higher eukaryotes. Navarro A, Boveris A, Ba´ndez MJ, Sa´nchez-Pino MJ, Go´mez C,
Autophagy4:151–17

Chunk 38:
rkinson’s disease and the gut: a well known clinical associ-
Klionsky DJ, Abeliovich H, Agostinis P, Agrawal DK, Aliev G, ation in need of an effective cure and explanation. Neurogas-
AskewDSetal(2008)Guidelinesfortheuseandinterpretation troenterolMotil20:741–749
of assays for monitoring autophagy in higher eukaryotes. Navarro A, Boveris A, Ba´ndez MJ, Sa´nchez-Pino MJ, Go´mez C,
Autophagy4:151–175 Muntane´ G,FerrerI(2009)Humanbraincortex:mitochondrial
KoziorowskiD,FriedmanA,ArosioP,SantambrogioP,Dziewulska oxidative damage and adaptive response in Parkinson disease
D(2007)ELISArevealsadifferenceinthestructureofsubstantia and in dementia with Lewy bodies. Free Radic Biol Med
nigra ferritin in Parkinson’s disease and incidental Lewy body 46:1574–1580
comparedtocontrol.ParkinsonismRelatDisord13:214–218 Oakley AE, Collingwood JF, Dobson J, Love G, Perrott HR,
KuusistoE,ParkkinenL,AlafuzoffI(2003)MorphogenesisofLewy Edwardson JA, Elstner M, Morris CM (2007) Individual
bodies: dissimilar incorporation of alpha-synuclein, ubiquitin, dopaminergic neurons show raised iron levels in Parkinson
andp62.JNeuropatholExpNeurol62:1241–1253 disease.Neurology68:1820–1825
Leverenz JB, Umar I, Wang Q, Montine TJ, McMillan PJ, Tsuang OlanowCW,McNaughtKS(2006)Ubiquitin-proteasomesystemand
DW, Jin J, Pan C, Shin J, Zhu D, Zhang J (2007) Proteomic Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisord21:1806–1823
identification of novel proteins in cortical Lewy bodies. Brain OnyangoIG(2008)Mitochondrialdysfunctionandoxidativestressin
Pathol17:139–145 Parkinson’sdisease.NeurochemRes33:589–597
LiW,WestN,CollaE,PletnikovaO,TroncosoJC,MarshL,Dawson Pan T, Kondo S, Le W, Jankovic J (2008) The role of autophagy-
TM, Jakala P, Hartmann T, Price DL, Lee MK (2005) lysosomepathwayinneurodegenerationassociatedwithParkin-
AggregationpromotingC-terminaltruncationofalpha-synuclein son’sdisease.Brain131:1969–1978
is a normal cellular process and is enhanced by the familial Parker WD, Boyson SJ, Parks JK (1989) Abnormalities of t

Chunk 39:
roncosoJC,MarshL,Dawson Pan T, Kondo S, Le W, Jankovic J (2008) The role of autophagy-
TM, Jakala P, Hartmann T, Price DL, Lee MK (2005) lysosomepathwayinneurodegenerationassociatedwithParkin-
AggregationpromotingC-terminaltruncationofalpha-synuclein son’sdisease.Brain131:1969–1978
is a normal cellular process and is enhanced by the familial Parker WD, Boyson SJ, Parks JK (1989) Abnormalities of the
Parkinson’s disease-linked mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA electron transport chain in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Ann
102:2162–2167 Neurol26:719–723
MakSK,McCormackAL,Manning-BogAB,CuervoAM,DiMonte ParkkinenL,KauppinenT,Pirttila¨ T,AutereJM,AlafuzoffI(2005)
DA(2010)Lysosomaldegradationofa-synucleininvivo.JBiol a-Synuclein pathology does not predict extrapyramidal symp-
Chem285:13621–13629 tomsordementia.AnnNeurol57:82–91
Markesbery WR, Jicha GA, Liu H, Schmitt FA (2009) Lewy body Parkkinen L, Pirttila¨ T, Alafuzoff I (2008) Applicability of current
pathologyinnormalelderlysubjects.JNeuropatholExpNeurol staging/categorizationofa-synucleinpathologyandtheirclinical
68:816–822 relevance.ActaNeuropathol115:399–407
Mart´ınez A, Portero-Otin M, Pamplona R, Ferrer I (2010) Protein Pearce RK, Hawkes CH, Daniel SE (1995) The anterior olfactory
targetsofoxidativedamageinhumanneurodegenerativediseases nucleusinParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord10:283–287
withabnormalproteinaggregates.BrainPathol20:281–297 PedersenKF,AlvesG,AarslandD,LarsenJP(2009)Occurrenceand
Mart´ınez-VicenteM,TalloczyZ,KaushikS,MasseyAC,MazzulliJ, riskfactorsforapathyinParkinsondisease:a4-yearprospective
Mosharov EV, Hodara R, Fredenburg R, Wu DC, Follenzi A, longitudinal study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 80:1279–
DauerW,PrzedborskiS,IschiropoulosH,LansburyPT,Sulzer 1782
D, Cuervo AM (2008) Dopamine-modified alpha-synuclein Poewe W (2007) Dysautonomia and cognitive dysfunction in
blocks chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Clin Invest 118:777– Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisordSuppl17:S374–S378
788 PoeweW(2008)Non-motor

Chunk 40:
dara R, Fredenburg R, Wu DC, Follenzi A, longitudinal study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 80:1279–
DauerW,PrzedborskiS,IschiropoulosH,LansburyPT,Sulzer 1782
D, Cuervo AM (2008) Dopamine-modified alpha-synuclein Poewe W (2007) Dysautonomia and cognitive dysfunction in
blocks chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Clin Invest 118:777– Parkinson’sdisease.MovDisordSuppl17:S374–S378
788 PoeweW(2008)Non-motorsymptomsinParkinson’sdisease.EurJ
Matsuda S, Okano M, Yamagishi K, Nagao M, Ueda M, Sasaki R Neurol15(Suppl1):14–20
(1994) A novel site of erythropoietin production. Oxygen- Postuma RB,Lang AE, Massicotte-Marquez J, MontplaisirJ (2006)
dependent production in cultured rat astrocytes. J Biol Chem PotentialearlymarkersofParkinsondiseaseinidiopathicREM
269:19488–19493 sleepbehavioraldisorder.Neurology66:845–851
123

---PAGE BREAK---

NeuropathologyofsporadicParkinsondisease 839
Richter F, Meurers BH, Zhu C, Medvedeva VP (2009) Neurons human substantia nigra: a targeted proteomics approach. Mol
express haemoglobin a- and b-chains in rat and human brains. CellProteomics8:1832–1838
JCompNeurol515:538–547 VaraniK,VincenziF,TosiA,GessiS,CasettaI,GranieriG,FazioP,
RockensteinE,HansenLA,MalloryM,TrojanowskiJQ,GalaskoD, Leung E, MacLennan S, Granieri E, Borea PA (2010) A2A
Masliah E (2001) Altered expression of the synuclein family adenosine receptor overexpression and functionality, as well as
mRNA in Lewy body and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res TNF-alphalevels,correlatewithmotorsymptomsinParkinson’s
914:48–56 disease.FASEBJ24:587–598
RossGW,PetrovitchH,AbbottRD,TannerCM,PopperJ,MasakiK, Vogiatzi T, Xilouri M, Vekrellis K, Stefanis L (2008) Wild type
LaunerL,WhiteLR(2008)Associationofolfactorydysfunction a-synuclein is degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy and
withriskforfutureParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol63:167–173 macroautophagy in neuronal cells. J Biol Chem 283:23542–
Ryu MY, Kim DW, Arima K, Mouradian MM, Kim SU, Lee G 23556
(2008) Localization of CKII beta subunits in Lewy bo

Chunk 41:
iatzi T, Xilouri M, Vekrellis K, Stefanis L (2008) Wild type
LaunerL,WhiteLR(2008)Associationofolfactorydysfunction a-synuclein is degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy and
withriskforfutureParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol63:167–173 macroautophagy in neuronal cells. J Biol Chem 283:23542–
Ryu MY, Kim DW, Arima K, Mouradian MM, Kim SU, Lee G 23556
(2008) Localization of CKII beta subunits in Lewy bodies of WakabayashiK,MatsumotoK,TakayamaK,YoshimotoM,Takahashi
Parkinson’sdisease.JNeurolSci266:9–12 H(1997)NACP,apresynapticprotein,immunoreactivityinLewy
Saito Y, Ruberu NN, Sawabe M, Arai T, Kazama H, Hosoi T, bodiesinParkinson’sdisease.NeurosciLett249:180–182
Yamanouchi H, Murayama S (2004) Lewy body-related a-syn- Wakabayashi K, Tanji K, Mori F, Takahashi H (2007) The Lewy
ucleinopathyinaging.JNeuropatholExpNeurol63:742–749 body in Parkinson’s disease: molecules implicated in the
Salazar J, Mena N, Nu´n˜ez MT (2006) Iron dyshomeostasis in formation and degradation ofa-synuclein aggregates. Neuropa-
Parkinson’sdisease.JNeuralTransmSuppl71:205–213 thology27:494–506
SchapiraAH(2008)Mitochondriaintheaetiologyandpathogenesis Wang HQ, Takahashi R (2007) Expanding insights on the involve-
ofParkinson’sdisease.LancetNeurol7:97–109 ment of endoplasmic reticulum stress in Parkinson’s disease.
Schults CW (2006) Lewy bodies. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA AntioxidRedoxSignal9:553–561
103:1661–1668 Wang R, Qing H, Liu XQ, Zheng XL, Deng YL (2008) Iron
Shamoto-NagaiM,MaruyamaW,HashizumeY,YoshidaM,Osawa contributes to the formation of catechol isoquinolines and
T,Riederer P,Naoi M(2007)Inparkinsonian substantianigra, oxidativetoxicityinducedbyoverdosedopamineindopaminer-
a-synucleinismodifiedbyacrolein,alipid-peroxidationproduct, gicSH-SY5Ycells.NeurosciBull24:125–132
andaccumulatesinthedopamineneuronswithinhibitionofthe WaxmanEA,GiassonBI(2008)Specificityandregulationofcasein
proteasomeactivity.JNeuralTransm114:1559–1567 kinase-mediatedphosphorylationofalpha-synuclein.JNeuropa-
SiderowfA,Ste

Chunk 42:
 substantianigra, oxidativetoxicityinducedbyoverdosedopamineindopaminer-
a-synucleinismodifiedbyacrolein,alipid-peroxidationproduct, gicSH-SY5Ycells.NeurosciBull24:125–132
andaccumulatesinthedopamineneuronswithinhibitionofthe WaxmanEA,GiassonBI(2008)Specificityandregulationofcasein
proteasomeactivity.JNeuralTransm114:1559–1567 kinase-mediatedphosphorylationofalpha-synuclein.JNeuropa-
SiderowfA,SternMB(2008)PremotorParkinson’sdisease:clinical tholExpNeurol67:402–416
features, detection, and prospects for treatment. Ann Neurol WeismanD,ChoM,TaylorC,AdameA,ThalLJ,HansenLA(2007)
64(Suppl2):S139–S147 In dementia with Lewy bodies, Braak stage determines pheno-
SolanoSM,MillerDW,AugoodSJ,YoungAB,PenneyJBJr(2000) type,notLewybodydistribution.Neurology69:356–359
Expression of alpha-synuclein, parkin, and ubiquitin carboxy- WirdefeldtK,BogdanovicN,WesterbergL,PayamiH,SchallingM,
terminalhydrolaseL1mRNAinhumanbrain:genesassociated MurdochG(2001)Expressionofalpha-synucleininthehuman
withfamilialParkinson’sdisease.AnnNeurol47:201–210 brain:relationtoLewybodydisease.BrainResMolBrainRes
Spillantini MG, Schmidt M, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Kaques R, 92:58–65
Goedert M (1997) a-Synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature Wypijewska A, Galazka-Friedman J, Bauminger ER, Wszolek ZK,
388:839–840 SchweitzerKJ,DicksonDW,JaklewiczA,ElbaumD,Friedman
SrivastavaG,SinghK,TiwariMN,SinghMP(2010)Proteomicsin A (2010) Iron and reactive oxygen species activity in parkin-
Parkinson’sdisease:currenttrends,translationalsnagsandfuture soniansubstantianigra.ParkinsonismRelatDisord16:329–333
possibilities.ExpertRevProteomics7:127–139 XiaQ,LiaoL,ChengD,DuongDM,GearingM,LahJJ,LeveyAI,
Stefanis L, Larsen KE, Rideout HJ, Sulzer D, Greene LA (2001) Peng J (2008) Proteomic identification of novel proteins
ExpressionofA53Tmutantbutnotwild-typealpha-synucleinin associatedwithLewybodies.FrontBiosci13:3850–3856
PC12 cells induces alterations of the ubiquitin-dependent XilouriM,VogiatziT,VekrellisK,StefanisL(2008)alpha-synuclei

Chunk 43:
7:127–139 XiaQ,LiaoL,ChengD,DuongDM,GearingM,LahJJ,LeveyAI,
Stefanis L, Larsen KE, Rideout HJ, Sulzer D, Greene LA (2001) Peng J (2008) Proteomic identification of novel proteins
ExpressionofA53Tmutantbutnotwild-typealpha-synucleinin associatedwithLewybodies.FrontBiosci13:3850–3856
PC12 cells induces alterations of the ubiquitin-dependent XilouriM,VogiatziT,VekrellisK,StefanisL(2008)alpha-synuclein
degradation system, loss of dopamine release, and autophagic degradationbyautophagicpathways:apotentialkeytoParkin-
celldeath.JNeurosci21:9549–9560 son’sdiseasepathogenesis.Autophagy4:917–919
Stiasny-KolsterK,DoerrY,Mo¨llerJC,Ho¨ffkenH,BehrTM,Oertel Youdim MB (2008) Brain iron deficiency and excess; cognitive
WH, Mayer G (2005) Combination of idiopathic REM sleep impairmentandneurodegenerationwithinvolvementofstriatum
behaviour disorder and olfactory dysfunction as possible indi- andhippocampus.NeurotoxRes14:45–56
cator for alpha-synucleinopathy demonstrated by dopamine Zecca L, Lucca FA, Albertini A, Rizzio E, Fariello RG (2006) A
transporterFP-CIT-SPECT.Brain128:126–137 proposed dual role of neuromelanin in the pathogenesis of
TangCC,PostonKL,DhawanV,EidelbergD(2010)Abnormalities Parkinsondisease.Neurology67(Suppl2):S8–S11
in metabolic network activity precede the onset of motor Zecca L, Casella L, Albertini A, Bellei C, Zucca FA, Engelen M,
symptomsinParkinson’sdisease.JNeurosci30:1049–1056 ZadloA,SzewczykG,ZarebaM,SarnaT(2008)Neuromelanin
Tolosa E, Compta Y, Gaig C (2007) The premotor phase of can protect against iron-mediated oxidative damage in system
Parkinson’sdisease.ParkinsonismRelDisord13:S2–S7 modelingironoverloadofbrainagingandParkinson’sdisease.
TriblF,MarcusK,MeyerHE,BringmannG,GerlachM,RiedererP JNeurochem106:1866–1875
(2006)Subcellularproteomicsrevealsneuromelaningranulesto Zeevalk GD, Razmpour R, Bernard LP (2008) Glutathione and
bealysosome-relatedorganelle.JNeuralTransm113:741–749 Parkinson’s disease: is this the elephant in the room? Biomed
TriblF,Asa

Chunk 44:
kinsonismRelDisord13:S2–S7 modelingironoverloadofbrainagingandParkinson’sdisease.
TriblF,MarcusK,MeyerHE,BringmannG,GerlachM,RiedererP JNeurochem106:1866–1875
(2006)Subcellularproteomicsrevealsneuromelaningranulesto Zeevalk GD, Razmpour R, Bernard LP (2008) Glutathione and
bealysosome-relatedorganelle.JNeuralTransm113:741–749 Parkinson’s disease: is this the elephant in the room? Biomed
TriblF,AsanE,ArzbergerT,TatschnerT,LangenfeldE,MeyerHE, Pharmacother62:236–249
Bringmann G, Riederer P, Gerlach M, Marcus K (2009) ZiemssenT,ReichmannH(2007)Non-motordysfunctioninParkin-
Identification of L-ferritin in neuromelanin granules of the son’sdisease.ParkinsonismRelDisord13:323–332
123

---PAGE BREAK---



