Chunk 1:
www.nature.com/cddis
REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
’
Alpha-synuclein in Parkinson s disease and other
synucleinopathies: from overt neurodegeneration back to early
synaptic dysfunction
✉
Paolo Calabresi 1,2,6 , Alessandro Mechelli 3,6, Giuseppina Natale1, LauraVolpicelli-Daley4,Giulia DiLazzaro2,7 and
Veronica Ghiglieri2,5,7
©TheAuthor(s)2023
Althoughthediscoveryofthecriticalroleofα-synuclein(α-syn)inthepathogenesisofParkinson’sdisease(PD)isnowtwenty-five
yearsold,itstillrepresentsamilestoneinPDresearch.Abnormalformsofα-syntriggerselectiveandprogressiveneuronaldeath
throughmitochondrialimpairment,lysosomaldysfunction,andalterationofcalciumhomeostasisnotonlyinPDbutalsoinotherα-
syn-relatedneurodegenerativedisorderssuchasdementiawithLewybodies,multiplesystematrophy,pureautonomicfailure,and
REMsleepbehaviordisorder.Furthermore,α-syn-dependentearlysynapticandplasticalterationsandtheunderlyingmechanisms
precedingovertneurodegenerationhaveattractedgreatinterest.Inparticular,thepresenceofearlyinflammationinexperimental
modelsandPDpatients,occurringbeforedepositionandspreadingofα-syn,suggestsamechanisticlinkbetweeninflammation
andsynapticdysfunction.Theknowledgeoftheseearlymechanismsisofseminalimportancetosupporttheresearchonreliable
biomarkersto precociously identify thedisease and possible disease-modifying therapies targeting α-syn. Inthis review,wewill
discuss thesecritical issues, providing a stateofthe artof therole ofthis protein inearly PD andother synucleinopathies.
CellDeathand Disease (2023) 14:176 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-05672-9
FACTS described. Abnormal aggregates of α-syn, such as Lewy bodies
(LB) and Lewy neurites, and glial cell inclusions have been then
● Alpha-synuclein aggregates perturb dopaminergic transmis-
implicatedinseveralsporadicneurodegenerativediseasestermed
sion andinduce presynaptic andpostsynaptic dysfunctions. α-synucleinopathies,includingidiopathicPD,DementiawithLewy
● Distinct cell types can be differentially affected by alpha-
bodies (

Chunk 2:
f α-syn, such as Lewy bodies
(LB) and Lewy neurites, and glial cell inclusions have been then
● Alpha-synuclein aggregates perturb dopaminergic transmis-
implicatedinseveralsporadicneurodegenerativediseasestermed
sion andinduce presynaptic andpostsynaptic dysfunctions. α-synucleinopathies,includingidiopathicPD,DementiawithLewy
● Distinct cell types can be differentially affected by alpha-
bodies (DLB), Multiple systems atrophy (MSA), Pure autonomic
synuclein aggregates over the course of the disease in
failure(PAF)andREMsleepbehaviordisorder(RBD)(seeTable1)
preclinical studies. [3–5]. However, many critical questions remain regarding its
● Immune response to alpha-synuclein misfolding contributes
physiological role, as well as a successful strategy to target this
todisease progression.
protein toprevent neurodegenerative disease.
● Parkinson’s Disease (PD), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), In the first part of the review, we report new evidence on the
MultipleSystemAtrophy(MSA),PureAutonomicFailure(PAF) current knowledge on α-syn physiological function in cellular
and REM sleep Behavior Disorder (RBD) show synuclein-
structures and organelles, in particular focusing on the synaptic
related neuroinflammation and share clinical, neurochemical sites. We then discuss how pathological α-syn modulates
and morphological features.
dopaminergic transmission and its potential impact on other
● New therapies targeting alpha-synuclein include passive and
susceptible neuronsubtypes.
active immunization andmodulators ofprotein aggregation. In the second part of the review, the emerging role of α-syn-
mediated neuroinflammation is presented and discussed as a
critical factor leading the way to the onset of neuronal death
pathwaysanditspotentialimpactonsynapseloss.Moreover,we
MAINTEXT provideanoverviewoftherecentfindingssuggestingthatα-syn-
The discovery of the critical role of α-synuclein (α-syn) in the
induced early synaptic dysfunctions may precede overt neurode-
pathogenesis of

Chunk 3:
ole of α-syn-
mediated neuroinflammation is presented and discussed as a
critical factor leading the way to the onset of neuronal death
pathwaysanditspotentialimpactonsynapseloss.Moreover,we
MAINTEXT provideanoverviewoftherecentfindingssuggestingthatα-syn-
The discovery of the critical role of α-synuclein (α-syn) in the
induced early synaptic dysfunctions may precede overt neurode-
pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD) was postulated more
generation as a critical mechanism causing prodromal PD
than twenty years ago [1, 2] when genetic forms of PD were
symptoms.
1Sezione di Neurologia, Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome 00168, Italy. 2Neurologia, Fondazione
PoliclinicoUniversitarioAgostinoGemelliIRCCS,Rome00168,Italy.3DipartimentodiScienzeMedicheeChirurgiche,IstitutodiNeurologia,Università“MagnaGraecia”,Catanzaro,
Italy.4CenterforNeurodegenerationandExperimentalTherapeutics,UniversityofAlabamaatBirmingham,Birmingham,AL35294,USA.5UniversitàTelematicaSanRaffaele,
Rome00166,Italy.6Theseauthorscontributedequally:PaoloCalabresi,AlessandroMechelli.7Theseauthorsjointlysupervisedthiswork:GiuliaDiLazzaro,VeronicaGhiglieri.
✉
email:paolo.calabresi@policlinicogemelli.it
EditedbyProfessorGerryMelino
Received:19October2022Revised:18January2023Accepted:9February2023
OfficialjournalofCDDpress
:,;)(0987654321

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
2
Table1. Othersynucleinopathies.
Mainfeatures
DementiawithLewybodies(DLB)
•DLBandParkinson’sdisease-dementia(PDD)aresynuclein-relateddiseasesthatsharemanyclinical,neurochemicalandmorphologicalfeatures.
•Thedifferentialdiagnosisbetweenthesedisordersisbasedonadistinctionbetweenthetimeofonsetofmotorandcognitivesymptoms.
DementiaoftenprecedesparkinsonisminDLB,whiletheonsetofcognitiveimpairmentfollowsmotorsymptomsinPDD.
•Diffusecorticalandsubcorticalaggregationsofα-syn(Lewybodies,LB)plusβ-amyloidandtaupathologiescanbepresentinbothconditions.
•Clinicalandneuropathologicalfin

Chunk 4:
landmorphologicalfeatures.
•Thedifferentialdiagnosisbetweenthesedisordersisbasedonadistinctionbetweenthetimeofonsetofmotorandcognitivesymptoms.
DementiaoftenprecedesparkinsonisminDLB,whiletheonsetofcognitiveimpairmentfollowsmotorsymptomsinPDD.
•Diffusecorticalandsubcorticalaggregationsofα-syn(Lewybodies,LB)plusβ-amyloidandtaupathologiescanbepresentinbothconditions.
•ClinicalandneuropathologicalfindingssuggestthatDLBischaracterizedbyadistinctregionalspreadingpatternofLB,alessrobustresponseto
dopaminergictherapyandahighprevalenceofAlzheimer-likepathologyatpostmortemexamination.
Multiplesystematrophy(MSA)
•MSAisanadult-onsetsporadicα-synucleinopathy,withsymptomsofparkinsonism,cerebellarataxiaandavariablecombinationofautonomic
failure.
•MSApatientsareclassifiedasMSA-P,withpredominantlevodopa-unresponsiveparkinsonismcausedbystriatonigraldegeneration,andMSA-C,
withcerebellarataxiaassociatedwitholivopontocerebellaratrophy.
•MSAisdefinedbyneuronallossandabundantfilamentousα-syninclusionsselectivelyfoundinoligodendrocytes;α-synfilamentsfromthe
brainsofpatientswithMSAandDLBhavedifferentconformations,suggestingthatdistinctstrainscharacterizetheseconditions.
•Transgenicandvirus-basedmodelsoverexpressinghumanα-syninoligodendrocytesusingdifferentpromotershavebeengeneratedto
recapitulatethedisease.
•Ongoingclinicaltrialstargetα-synthroughimmunotherapyapproaches,inhibitionofoligomerizationandaggregationofthisprotein.
Pureautonomicfailure(PAF)
•PAFisarareandsporadicneurodegenerativedisorderoftheautonomicnervoussystem,clinicallycharacterizedbyorthostatichypotension.
Autonomicfailuremayalsomanifestasgenitourinary,bowel,andthermoregulatorydysfunctions.REMbehaviordisorderandhyposmiaarealso
commonfeaturesinpatientswithPAF.
•Pathologically,PAFischaracterizedbypredominantlyperipheraldepositionofα-syninvolvingthesympatheticgangliaandperipheralautonomic
nerves.LBs,though,canalsobefoundincentralnervoussystemstructuressuchassubstantianigraandlocuscoeruleus.
•Aboutone-thirdofPAFpatientsshowphen

Chunk 5:
nifestasgenitourinary,bowel,andthermoregulatorydysfunctions.REMbehaviordisorderandhyposmiaarealso
commonfeaturesinpatientswithPAF.
•Pathologically,PAFischaracterizedbypredominantlyperipheraldepositionofα-syninvolvingthesympatheticgangliaandperipheralautonomic
nerves.LBs,though,canalsobefoundincentralnervoussystemstructuressuchassubstantianigraandlocuscoeruleus.
•Aboutone-thirdofPAFpatientsshowphenoconversiontoacentralα-synucleinopathywithmotororcognitiveinvolvementsuchasPD,DLB,or
MSAwithin4yearsfromthediagnosis.
•Recently,amousemodelofPAFhasbeengeneratedwithα-synpreformedfibrils(PFFs)injectionintothestellateandceliacganglia,generatinga
spreadingoftheα-synpathologyonlythroughtheautonomicnervoussystembidirectionally.
REMbehaviordisorder(RBD)
•RBDisaREMsleepparasomniafirstdescribedin1986andcharacterizedbythelossofphysiologicalmuscleatoniatypicalofREMsleep.
•Inrecentyears,follow-upstudieshaveshownthatmostRBDpatientswilldevelopanovertα-synucleinopathyovertime,witharateof
phenoconversionofabout75%after12yearsfromdiagnosis.
•Todate,noreliablecandidatebiomarkerscanpredictphenoconversion,itstiming,andthephenotypeoftheα-synucleinopathythepatientwill
develop.
We also provide an overview of the clinical evidence that binding and chaperone-like activity [10] (Fig. 1A). A recent study
measures of different forms of α-syn, alone or combined with showedthat thebindingof Ca2+tothe Cterminusof α-syn also
other molecules, may represent reliable biomarkers of disease regulatesitsbindingtosynapticmembranes[11].InPD,LBDand
initiation and progression in PD and other synucleinopathies. PAF, α-syn adopts a pathological β-sheet conformation that
Finally, we summarize clinical trials on disease-modifying thera- recruits additional monomers to form oligomers and amyloid
piestargeting α-syninthese neurodegenerative disorders. fibrils.Theinclusionslocalizetoaxons,calledLewyneurites,orthe
neuron soma, called LB [8, 11]. In MSA, α-syn aggregates form
mainly glial cytoplasmic inclusions, also calle

Chunk 6:
adopts a pathological β-sheet conformation that
Finally, we summarize clinical trials on disease-modifying thera- recruits additional monomers to form oligomers and amyloid
piestargeting α-syninthese neurodegenerative disorders. fibrils.Theinclusionslocalizetoaxons,calledLewyneurites,orthe
neuron soma, called LB [8, 11]. In MSA, α-syn aggregates form
mainly glial cytoplasmic inclusions, also called Papp-Lantos
ALPHA-SYNUCLEINSTRUCTURE ANDPHYSIOLOGICAL bodies, argyrophilic inclusions in oligodendrocytes cytoplasm.
FUNCTION Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions are also found, but with distinct
A-syn is a small (14 KDa) acidic protein expressed in neurons of distributionsascomparedtoLB,beingobservedintheputamen,
thecentralandperipheralnervoussystemaswellasinbloodcells pontinenuclei,and inferiorolivary nuclei [12].
and other tissues [6]. A-syn has long been defined as a ‘natively A-synpathologycanbeobservedininvitroandinvivomodels
unfolded’ monomer; however, it has been demonstrated that throughtheintroduction ofpathologicalα-synseeds intheform
endogenous α-syn naturally occurs in large part as a folded of preformed fibrils (PFFs) from recombinant α-syn monomers
tetramer of about 58 KDa with little or no amyloid-like [13],α-synobtainedfrombrainsamplesofpatients[14]orrodents
aggregationpotential[7].Thetwoformscoexist,butanimbalance carrying α-syn mutations [15]. A-syn aggregates can also be
inthetetramer:monomerratiocanleadtothepreponderanceof obtainedviaviralvector-mediatedoverexpressionofwild-typeα-
pro-aggregating forms. A-syn can be subdivided into three main syn[16].Thedifferentformsofα-synaggregatesormutantα-syn
regions, each responsible for different molecular and biological might initiate distinct processes in terms of perturbation of
properties [8]. The amino acid residues 1–60 represent the N- physiological function or damaging effect. However, most
terminus, which is characterized by amphipathic repetitions that molecular mechanisms triggered by these pathological 

Chunk 7:
formsofα-synaggregatesormutantα-syn
regions, each responsible for different molecular and biological might initiate distinct processes in terms of perturbation of
properties [8]. The amino acid residues 1–60 represent the N- physiological function or damaging effect. However, most
terminus, which is characterized by amphipathic repetitions that molecular mechanisms triggered by these pathological forms of
tend to form an α-helix structure. This portion of the protein is α-syn might share common pathways converging to similar
crucial for the capacity of α-syn to interact with membranes [9]. synapticdysfunctions.
Residues 61–95 constitute the non-amyloid-ß component (NAC Theinteractionofmonomericα-synwithitsfibrillarformisstill
region),identifiedasthemostaggregation-proneregion.Thefinal debatable.Recently,atransientinteractionofα-synmonomersvia
C-terminus(96–140)isnegativelychargedandisinvolvedinCa2+ their positively charged N-terminus with the negatively charged
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
3
Fig. 1 Modular structure of α-syn and its dynamic interactions with membrane lipids in physiological and pathological conditions.
A Alpha-syn is structurally characterized by three modular regions: the N-terminal (green), characterized by amphipathic repetitions, is
responsible for interactions with membranes; the hydrophobic NAC (blue), is relevant for aggregation, and the acidic C-terminal (red), is
involved in Ca2+ binding and chaperon-like activity. In the presence of low concentrations of Ca2+, α-syn is stably anchored to the lipid
surface via its N-terminal region only. With higher Ca2+ concentrations, also the NAC region, but not the C-terminus, shows lipid-binding
properties, suggesting that it plays a different role in modulating the affinity of α-syn for cellular membranes. B Left panel: in control
conditions, α-syn is important for regulating protein and neurotransmitter release by promoting SNARE complex formation and vesicle


Chunk 8:
ia its N-terminal region only. With higher Ca2+ concentrations, also the NAC region, but not the C-terminus, shows lipid-binding
properties, suggesting that it plays a different role in modulating the affinity of α-syn for cellular membranes. B Left panel: in control
conditions, α-syn is important for regulating protein and neurotransmitter release by promoting SNARE complex formation and vesicle
dockingduringtheexocytosisprocess.Extracellularα-syncanaffectrecipientneuronsbyfast(i.e.,kiss-and-runmode)andslow(i.e.,clathrin-
mediatedendocytosis,CME)modesofmembraneretrieval,asseveralendocytoticpathwayscancoexistinasinglesynapse.Interestingly,α-
syn is associated with the CME of synaptic vesicles due to its role in sensing and stabilizing the curved membranes. Right panel: under
physiological conditions (green), α-syn exists in different conformations balance between unstructured soluble monomeric and tetrameric
forms.Underpathologicalconditions(lightred),whenthebalancebetweenα-syngenerationandclearanceisdisrupted,α‐synaggregates
intooligomers,protofibrils,andfibrils,whichfurtherbringtotheformationofproteininclusionscalledLB.
flexibleC-terminalendsofthefibrilswasdemonstrated[17].These aggregationthatleadstorapidmultiplicationofα-syn,catalyzing
intermolecular interactions result in an unfolding process and thegenerationofnewamyloidsfrommonomersontheirsurface,
consequent exposure of the aggregation-prone components of a process called secondary nucleation. Oligomers produced
the protein. This condition represents a prerequisite for protein during secondary surface nucleation induce the permeabilization
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
4
of cell membranes through to their lipophilic properties. S129 and α-syn aggregation in PD and other synucleinopathies
Associated with these events, higher basal levels of cytosolic [33]. Moreover,phosphorylationof other residues localizedat the
Ca2+, increased Ca2+ influx upon stimulation, and delayed 

Chunk 9:
ce the permeabilization
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
4
of cell membranes through to their lipophilic properties. S129 and α-syn aggregation in PD and other synucleinopathies
Associated with these events, higher basal levels of cytosolic [33]. Moreover,phosphorylationof other residues localizedat the
Ca2+, increased Ca2+ influx upon stimulation, and delayed C-terminal region of the protein has been associated with these
recovery of Ca2+ levels in neurons are then observed since the diseases[33].
earlyphases,leadingtomultipleCa2+homeostasisalterationsthat
persist withdisease progression [18].
Native α-syn is present in synaptic terminals, in the nucleus of A-SYNAND DOPAMINERGIC TRANSMISSION
neuronalcells[19],mitochondria[20],endoplasmicreticulum(ER) Since α-syn is implicated in sporadic and familial forms of PD,
[21], Golgi apparatus (GA) [22], and intheendolysosomal system many studies have investigated its role in modulating dopamine
[23]. However, its physiological function in each subcellular (DA) neurotransmission. Mutant mice lacking α-syn show a
compartment isonlypartially understood. reduced DA striatal content and inhibition of DA-dependent
A-syn is mainly present at presynaptic sites where it interacts motor response to amphetamine, which enhances motor activity
with proteins involved in the release and reuptake of neuro- through the DA active transporter (DAT)-dependent mechanism
transmitters [24]. Moreover, α-syn is involved in sensing and [34, 35]. Moreover, animal models’ data strongly agree that
stabilizing curved membranes [25] and regulating the synaptic overexpression of α-syn leads to a direct insult to the dopami-
vesiclepoolandtrafficking[26].Inthisregard,α-synhasarolein nergicsystem,reportedasadecreaseintyrosinehydroxylase(TH)
theassemblyoftheSolubleN-ethylmaleimideAttachmentprotein activity and expression within the striatum [36]. However, one
REceptor(SNARE)complex,whichconsistsofasetofpresynaptic drawba

Chunk 10:
nes [25] and regulating the synaptic overexpression of α-syn leads to a direct insult to the dopami-
vesiclepoolandtrafficking[26].Inthisregard,α-synhasarolein nergicsystem,reportedasadecreaseintyrosinehydroxylase(TH)
theassemblyoftheSolubleN-ethylmaleimideAttachmentprotein activity and expression within the striatum [36]. However, one
REceptor(SNARE)complex,whichconsistsofasetofpresynaptic drawback of using transgenic mice overexpressing α-syn as a
proteins that mediate different phases of the exocytosis process modelforPDisthatitisnotclearifphenotypesarecausedbyα-
[24](Fig.1B).Resultsobtainedfrommicewitheitherknockoutor syn overexpression and more normal α-helical α-syn at mem-
overexpression of the α-syn gene support the concept of a branes or increased formation of pathological α-syn. Therefore,
regulatory function of α-syn in exocytosis and neurotransmitter models that more directly recapitulate the formation of patholo-
release. A recent study showed that α-syn interacts with vesicle- gicalα-synassembliesbetterreflecttheimpactofabnormalα-syn
associatedmembraneprotein2(VAMP2)whereitactsasabrake inDAtransmission.
onsynapticvesicleexocytosis[27].Thelackofphysiologicalα-syn Exposure of neurons to α-syn oligomers increases Ca2+
has been associated with a reduction in the number of synaptic intracellular levels, thus inducing DA release in striatal slices via
vesicles of distal pools [28], whereas its overexpression has been multiple mechanisms [37]. When neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis is
shown to increase the number of vesicles docked to the disrupted, ATP expenses for maintaining an electrochemical
membranes [29]. For these features, α-syn can be essential in gradient across the membrane increase, enhancing neuronal
preventing a vesicle collapse during kiss-and-run exocytosis and vulnerability and altering neurotransmitter release. Slow Ca2+
improves fast membrane retrieval mechanisms. Given the coex- oscillations in SNpc DA neurons trigger their typical slow tonic
ist

Chunk 11:
ing an electrochemical
membranes [29]. For these features, α-syn can be essential in gradient across the membrane increase, enhancing neuronal
preventing a vesicle collapse during kiss-and-run exocytosis and vulnerability and altering neurotransmitter release. Slow Ca2+
improves fast membrane retrieval mechanisms. Given the coex- oscillations in SNpc DA neurons trigger their typical slow tonic
istence of different endocytosis dynamics in the same synapse, firing,inducinganoscillationinmembranepotential[38,39].These
clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) or fast membrane retrieval oscillations also cause Ca2+ influx into the mitochondria, which
pathwaysoperateaccordingtosynapticactivity.Neuronsthatfire leadstooxidativephosphorylationandtheproductionofATP[40].
withhighfrequenciesmayneedfastorultrafastmembrane-saving Elevated mitochondrial Ca2+ and oxidative phosphorylation
mechanismstomaintainthestructureofthepresynapticterminal, promotefurtherα-synaggregation[41].Thus,theCa2+oscillations
compared with low-frequency firing neurons, whose endocytosis in DA neurons combined with pathological α-syn aggregates can
activity can be sufficiently sustained by CME. Interestingly, initiateatoxiccascadeleadingtoneurodegeneration.
synucleins may interact with these processes, as they are In physiological conditions, α-syn also controls the storage of
necessary for the rapid internalization of synaptic vesicle DAintosynapticvesiclesbyinteractingwithvesicularmonoamine
membranes,asdemonstratedbytheobservationthattheabsence transporter 2 (VMAT2) expression and activity in nigral neurons.
of all three synuclein isoforms, α-, β- and γ-, results in slowed Since VMAT2 is essential in reducing harmful oxidative effects of
endocytosis[30]. DAmetabolitesinthecytosol,animpairmentinthesequestration
This possible interaction is particularly relevant in cells with of DA into the synaptic vesicles caused by abnormal α-syn may
pacemaker activity, like the dopaminergic neurons of the represent one of

Chunk 12:
 three synuclein isoforms, α-, β- and γ-, results in slowed Since VMAT2 is essential in reducing harmful oxidative effects of
endocytosis[30]. DAmetabolitesinthecytosol,animpairmentinthesequestration
This possible interaction is particularly relevant in cells with of DA into the synaptic vesicles caused by abnormal α-syn may
pacemaker activity, like the dopaminergic neurons of the represent one of the earliest events in the degeneration of
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), the neuronal population dopaminergicneurons[42].Therelationshipbetweenoverexpres-
most severely affected in PD [31]. The continuous cycles of exo- sionofα-synandDATactivityandtraffickinghasbeenpostulated,
and endocytosis that these cells undergo throughout their life suggesting a positive correlation between α-syn levels and the
requirefastandhighlyefficientmolecularmachinery tomaintain reductioninDAuptake inthedorsal striatum [43].
intactpresynapticvesiclehomeostasis.Whenfastmechanismsfail, Takentogether,thesedatasuggestthatlong-termoverexpres-
CME may temporarily manage to guarantee a certain level of sion of α-syn decreases DA neurotransmission at different levels
vesicle supply that might not be sufficient for the demands of by reducing TH and VMAT2 expression and activity, increasing
high-frequencyfiringneurons.Inthatcontext,α-syncouldhavea DAT-mediated DAefflux,and reducing its uptake.
regulatoryroleinmaintainingsynaptichomeostasisuponintense
neuronalactivity.
If α-syn is involved in neuronal activity, could its sequestration NEURODEGENERATION ANDα-SYN:A QUESTION OF
into pathologic aggregates have implications on synaptic SELECTIVECELL-TYPE VULNERABILITY?
transmission? In particular, how does synaptic transmission Accordingly,neuronswithextensiveaxonalarborizationsandhigh
influence the spread of abnormal forms of α-syn? In vitro and requirementsformitochondrialactivity,suchasDAneurons,may
in vivo microdialysis experiments showed that ∼70% of extra- bemoresusceptibletoα-synaggregation[41

Chunk 13:
ave implications on synaptic SELECTIVECELL-TYPE VULNERABILITY?
transmission? In particular, how does synaptic transmission Accordingly,neuronswithextensiveaxonalarborizationsandhigh
influence the spread of abnormal forms of α-syn? In vitro and requirementsformitochondrialactivity,suchasDAneurons,may
in vivo microdialysis experiments showed that ∼70% of extra- bemoresusceptibletoα-synaggregation[41].A-synplaysadirect
cellularα-synderivesfromneuronalactivity-dependentpathways roleinmitochondrialactivity[44,45].Inparticular,pathologicalα-
[32]. syn mediates functional mitochondrial failure, disruption of
Several post-translational modifications, such as phosphoryla- mitochondrialmorphology[46],impairmentofcomplexIfunction
tion,canaffectα-synfoldingandaggregation,playingacriticalrole [47], mitochondria accumulation, and decreased basal mitochon-
in PD and other synucleinopathies. Less than 5% of the soluble, drial oxygen consumption rate [45]. There is also evidence that
monomeric α-syn is phosphorylated under physiological condi- nitrosativeandoxidativestresscausesabnormalproteinaccumu-
tions.Conversely,approximately90%ofα-synisphosphorylatedin lationbyimpairingtheubiquitin-proteasomesystem[48],leading
LBs, suggesting a close relationship between phosphorylation at to a vicious circle of oxidative cellular damage, toxic α-syn
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
5
accumulation, and neuronal death. In particular, increased A-syn gene (SNCA) missense mutations lead to the accumula-
mitochondrial oxidative stress in fibroblast-derived induced tionofα-synandactivationofmicroglia,neuroinflammation,and
pluripotent stem cells, differentiated into human nigral DA degenerationofthestriatalneurons[58].Inflammatorymediators,
neurons, triggers a DA-dependent toxic cascade, leading to such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), nitric oxide (NO), tumor
oxidized DA accumulation and reduction in glucocerebrosidase necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha(α), and interl

Chunk 14:
ofα-synandactivationofmicroglia,neuroinflammation,and
pluripotent stem cells, differentiated into human nigral DA degenerationofthestriatalneurons[58].Inflammatorymediators,
neurons, triggers a DA-dependent toxic cascade, leading to such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), nitric oxide (NO), tumor
oxidized DA accumulation and reduction in glucocerebrosidase necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha(α), and interleukin (IL)-1beta(β),
enzymatic activity, lysosomal dysfunctions, and α-syn accumula- derived from non-neuronal cells, are known to modulate the
tion [49].Besides these events, age‐related redox changes within progression ofneuronal celldeath inPD [59,60](Fig. 2).
nigralneuronsaremoreevidentwithintheventraltier,suggesting Themaineventsofneuroinflammationinwhichα-synseemsto
that increased redox dyshomeostasis may underlie the selective take an active part are the activation of microglia, the adaptive
vulnerability of thisnigral subregion [50]. immune response, and the mitochondrial dysfunctions [61].
While α-syn-related damage to mitochondrial activity is a Microglia represents the main resident cellular population with
common mechanism for virtually all cell body types, α-syn immunological functions in the brain. These cells maintain a
aggregatesarenotfoundrandomlyinthecentralnervoussystem deactivated profile while probing the surrounding microenviron-
(CNS) of PD patients [51], implying an increased susceptibility of ment, scavenging lipids, cellular debris, protein aggregates, and
specific brain areas to LB formation. A combination of structural secreting factors essential for the survival and activity of neurons
(i.e., extensively branched axons with a high number of and astrocytes [62]. Several studies, both in vivo and in vitro,
neurotransmitter release sites in spatially distributed networks) showed that α-syn could activate microglia, thus generating a
and functional features (i.e., broad spikes, slow pacemaking pathological inflammatory stimulus with different intens

Chunk 15:
 survival and activity of neurons
(i.e., extensively branched axons with a high number of and astrocytes [62]. Several studies, both in vivo and in vitro,
neurotransmitter release sites in spatially distributed networks) showed that α-syn could activate microglia, thus generating a
and functional features (i.e., broad spikes, slow pacemaking pathological inflammatory stimulus with different intensities of
activity, low intrinsic Ca2+ buffering and cytosolic Ca2+) seems response depending on the α-syn isoforms and PD-related gene
to better identify the neurons most vulnerable in PD [31]. These mutations[63].Mutantmonomericα-syntriggersastrongimmune
neuron-specific aspects of cell function are energetically expen- systemresponseatconcentrations,inwhichwild-typeα-syndoes
sive. It has been proposed that the limited energetic reserve this notcauseanimmuneactivation[64].Regardingα-synaggregates,
uniqueaxonalarchitectureimposesonDAnigralneuronsisakey all oligomeric α-syn species induce a dramatic immune cell
factorintheirsusceptibility.Undernormalcircumstances,thishigh activation, showing a correlation between the molecular weight
energy demand can be managed by neurons. However, any of oligomers and the intensity of the response, with α-syn fibrils
situation that perturbs the balance between energy production producingthemostpowerfulactivationofmonocytes[64].
and demand — such as mitochondrial dysfunction or oxidative Given the association between inflammation and higher risk for
stress — would lead to functional failure and, eventually, cell PD [65, 66], these data suggest that α-syn pathology and
death[52]. inflammatory state play a synergistic role in the excessive immune
Therefore,thefactorsregulatingthespreadofpathogenicα-syn system response contributing to the worsening of the PD state.
forms remain a matter of debate due to an incomplete Accordingly,cytokineslevels,likeIL-1β,TNF-α,IL-6,TGF-β,andIFN-γ,
understanding of how the vulnerability works in the context of w

Chunk 16:
α-syn pathology and
death[52]. inflammatory state play a synergistic role in the excessive immune
Therefore,thefactorsregulatingthespreadofpathogenicα-syn system response contributing to the worsening of the PD state.
forms remain a matter of debate due to an incomplete Accordingly,cytokineslevels,likeIL-1β,TNF-α,IL-6,TGF-β,andIFN-γ,
understanding of how the vulnerability works in the context of werefoundelevatedinCSFandserumofPDpatients,suggestingan
spread. Recently, by using a quantitative pathology mapping α-syn-mediated microglial activation [67]. The microglia activation
approach in the mouse brain, the spatiotemporal pattern of andthesubsequentimmuneresponsemightspreadacrossthebrain
spread has been clearly associated with two main factors: along with the α-syn inclusions, implying the participation of the
anatomical connectivity and endogenous α-syn expression in a innate immune system in the disease course [68]. Microgliosis may
givenarea[53]. alsocontributetothephagocytosisofinjuredsynapses,asshownin
In line with this preclinical study, results provided by the PD Alzheimer’sdisease(AD)[69].
progressionmarkersinitiative(PPMI)cohortindicatethreespatial Concerningtheinvolvementoftheadaptiveimmunesystemin
modesofdiseasespreadassociatedwithatypical,asevere,anda PD neuropathology, data obtained from human studies and
milder progression. The “typical” progression corresponds to the animal experiments have shown infiltrations of both CD8+ and
Braakstagingscheme[54].Themoresevereexpressionappearsto CD4+TcellsintheSNpcofPDsubjects[70,71](Fig.2),whichmay
involveearlierpropagationofthediseasetolimbicandprefrontal eventually leadto adaptiveimmune responses[72].
areas,possibly accountingfor dementia,mooddisturbances, and However,therelationshipbetweenadaptiveimmuneresponses
hallucinations seen in more severe/advanced cases of PD. In the and PD clinical history in human subjects has been only recently
milderphenotypes,thetremor-dominantformswithlesscognitive explored, as d

Chunk 17:
ionofthediseasetolimbicandprefrontal eventually leadto adaptiveimmune responses[72].
areas,possibly accountingfor dementia,mooddisturbances, and However,therelationshipbetweenadaptiveimmuneresponses
hallucinations seen in more severe/advanced cases of PD. In the and PD clinical history in human subjects has been only recently
milderphenotypes,thetremor-dominantformswithlesscognitive explored, as documented by an important study investigating α-
impairment, dopaminergic innervations are relatively preserved syn-specificTcellreactivityintwodifferentcohortsofPDpatients
for more extended periods. This tripartite dissociation of clinical withdifferentdisease duration[73].Tcellsweremostreactiveto
severityaccordswithhierarchicalclassificationschemesbasedon α-syninpatientsclosertothediagnosis,andtheirresponseseems
clinicalfeatures [55]. to lower over the years. Interestingly, T cells were reported to
An interesting issue regarding the relationship between LB respondtoα-synepitopesfoundinbothextracellularnativeα-syn
pathology and the occurrence of clinical parkinsonism is the andfibrilized α-syn [74].
description of incidental Lewy body disease features. In fact, Concerning the role of B cells in α-syn-related pathology,
neuropathologicalstudiesshowedadistributionpatternofα-syn- findings are still controversial since some studies report no
relatedpathologyalsointhoseagedindividualswithoutahistory alterationswhileothersdescribeadecrementofthesecellsinthe
of parkinsonism [56]. This evidence supports the hypothesis that peripheral blood population of PD patients [75]. Nonetheless,
nigralneuronallossanddiminishedTHimmunoreactivityprecede peripheral IgG+ B cells producing anti-α-syn antibodies were
theappearanceoflocalα-synpathologicalconditions,suggesting isolatedfrompatients,andthreedifferentantibodiesdisplayedα-
thatothermechanisms,oryetundetectedconformationsofα-syn, synaggregationinhibitingproperties,suggestingaprotectiverole
such as monomers and/or oligomers, determine nigr

Chunk 18:
alneuronallossanddiminishedTHimmunoreactivityprecede peripheral IgG+ B cells producing anti-α-syn antibodies were
theappearanceoflocalα-synpathologicalconditions,suggesting isolatedfrompatients,andthreedifferentantibodiesdisplayedα-
thatothermechanisms,oryetundetectedconformationsofα-syn, synaggregationinhibitingproperties,suggestingaprotectiverole
such as monomers and/or oligomers, determine nigral neuronal ofIgGin PDpathogenesis [75].
dysfunction duringpreclinical stages [57].
INFLAMMATION ANDOTHERSYNUCLEINOPATHIES
A-SYNAND ACTIVATION OFTHEIMMUNE SYSTEM INPD Dementia withLewy bodies
A growing body of evidence suggests that inflammation DLB is characterized by a combination of clinical features,
participates in the pathophysiology of PD and other synucleino- including recurrent visual hallucinations, cognitive fluctuations,
pathies at multiple levels and with different mechanisms, and motor symptoms of parkinsonism. Although several studies
ultimately contributing todisease progression. haveinvestigated inflammationinPD, thereisevidence showing
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
6
Fig. 2 Mechanisms underlying inflammation in PD. Neuropathological hallmarks of PD are the presence of intracellular inclusions
containingα-syn aggregates andthedeathofdopaminergic neuronsintheSNpcof themidbrain. Damage-Associated MolecularPatterns
(DAMPs), are endogenous danger molecules released from damaged or dying cells, resulting in microglia activation and persistent
neuroinflammation (1). Extracellular aggregates of α-syn released by neurons activateglial cells; the internalization of α-syn is followed by
activationofNADPHoxidasewiththeproductionofROS/NO,andbythereleaseofproinflammatorycytokines(TNF-α,IL-1β,IL-6,IFN-β)(2).In
addition,activated-microglialcellsproducemediatorssuchasTNF-αandIL-1βthatactivateastrocytes,whichinturnsecreteothercytokines
(TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6) (3). These factors act on dopaminergic neurons of the SNpc and spiny neurons of

Chunk 19:
l cells; the internalization of α-syn is followed by
activationofNADPHoxidasewiththeproductionofROS/NO,andbythereleaseofproinflammatorycytokines(TNF-α,IL-1β,IL-6,IFN-β)(2).In
addition,activated-microglialcellsproducemediatorssuchasTNF-αandIL-1βthatactivateastrocytes,whichinturnsecreteothercytokines
(TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6) (3). These factors act on dopaminergic neurons of the SNpc and spiny neurons of the striatum and further activate
microglia, amplifying the inflammatory response in a positive feedback loop. In particular, IFN-γ is secreted by T cells and is a cytokine
involvedinthedeathofDAneuronsinthedevelopmentofPD,whichisresponsibleforenhancingtheactivationofthesurroundingglialcells
(4).Inthisscenario,solubleimmunemoleculescaninfluencethemodulationofsynaptictransmissionandplasticity(5).Forexample,INF-β
influences NMDAR-mediated synaptic currents in spiny neurons. Conversely, TNF-α drives the internalization of AMPARs and reduces
corticostriatalsynapticstrengthandresultsinapreferentialremovalofCa2+-permeableAMPARs.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
7
that inflammation also plays an important role in DLB [76]. α-synapresynapticprotein,anytoxiceffectorevenapartialloss
Pathologicalfindingsandpreclinicalstudies suggestthat bothα- offunction can disrupt synapticfunctionality.
syn and amyloid/tau pathology play a role in initiating neuroin-
flammatory processes in DLB. Similarly, PET imaging and blood Presynaptic dysfunctions induced by α-synin PD
biomarkers support an increase in cerebral and peripheral Current research is increasingly focusing on the earliest patholo-
inflammation in the early phases of DLB, while these features gical synaptic changes induced by α-syn, as dysfunction of
are reduced with disease progression [77]. Moreover, it has been dopaminergic neurotransmission in PD was reported to precede
suggested that inDLB, as wellas in PD, markers of inflammation Lewy pathology and neurodegeneration [57, 85]. Neuropatholo-
m

Chunk 20:
ng on the earliest patholo-
inflammation in the early phases of DLB, while these features gical synaptic changes induced by α-syn, as dysfunction of
are reduced with disease progression [77]. Moreover, it has been dopaminergic neurotransmission in PD was reported to precede
suggested that inDLB, as wellas in PD, markers of inflammation Lewy pathology and neurodegeneration [57, 85]. Neuropatholo-
mayplayasentinelroleintheearlyphaseofthedisease.Indeed, gical evidence from PD patients shows that dopaminergic
the interaction between inflammation and α-syn-related and AD terminalsintheputamenarelostsignificantlyearlierthanneuron
pathology composes the complex pathological scenario for the soma [86]. This finding was also confirmed by PET studies that
appearanceofclinical DLB. identified a threshold for VMAT2 and DAT loss in nigrostriatal
terminals before any clinically noticeable manifestation of the
Multiple systematrophy disease[87].AnimalmodelsofPDwhereα-synwasoverexpressed
MSA is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by parkinson- via adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors, or mice genetically
ism, ataxia, and dysautonomia. Histopathologically, the hallmark modifiedtodisplayα-synfibril-inducedformation,confirmedthat
of MSA is the abnormal accumulation of α-syn within oligoden- loss of dopaminergic terminals occurs before any detectable
droglial cells, leading to neuroinflammation, demyelination, and neuronloss inSNpc [88–91].
neuronaldeath. A-syn aggregates at the axonal level lead to impaired
Ithasbeenreportedanastrocyticalongwithmicroglialactivation microtubular transport from the cell body to terminals [92–94].
intheMSAbrain[78].Arecentstudyhasalsoshownthatevenifa This event also impairs the transport to the soma of retrograde
significant change in brain cytokines, typical microglial products, signalingmoleculesandendosomesfromsynapticterminals,thus
cannot be detected, the analysis of mRNA shows a significant hindering the activation of transcription factors ess

Chunk 21:
t from the cell body to terminals [92–94].
intheMSAbrain[78].Arecentstudyhasalsoshownthatevenifa This event also impairs the transport to the soma of retrograde
significant change in brain cytokines, typical microglial products, signalingmoleculesandendosomesfromsynapticterminals,thus
cannot be detected, the analysis of mRNA shows a significant hindering the activation of transcription factors essential for
change in the expression of a subset of inflammation-associated survivaland neurite outgrowth [95].
genes. This finding confirms that an inflammatory response is As described above, α-syn aggregates gradually impair the
initiated in MSA [79]. At present, there is no disease-modifying molecular machinery involved in DA release from presynaptic
treatmentforMSA.Thus,itispossiblethattargetinginflammation- terminals[96,97],possiblythroughinteractionswithoxidizedDA
relatedprocessesmightlimitthediseaseprogression. that increase the chance for this protein to accumulate. Α-syn
inclusions are also involved in thesegregation ofcomponents of
REMsleep behaviordisorder the presynaptic apparatus and neurotransmitter transporters,
RBD can precede synucleinopathies, and may represent a including DAT and VMAT2, ultimately initiating a vicious cycle of
prodromal phenotype of PD. The role of neuroinflammation in α-syn accumulation and deregulation ofDArelease [26].
RBD and the association of this disorder with peripheral blood
inflammatorymarkersisamatterofdebate.Infact,arecentstudy Postsynaptic dysfunctions induced by α-synin PDmodels
hasrevealedincreasedmicroglialactivationinthesubstantianigra The complex role of DA as a key modulator of synaptic plasticity
inassociationwithreducednigrostriataldopaminergicactivity[80]. was thoroughly appraised by previous studies on the regulatory
However,thisfindinghasbeenquestionedbyasubsequentstudy effectofDAoverstriatalneurons’activity[98,99].Onthisbasis,a
that did not provide evidence supporting the role of peripheral largebodyofresearchinve

Chunk 22:
anigra The complex role of DA as a key modulator of synaptic plasticity
inassociationwithreducednigrostriataldopaminergicactivity[80]. was thoroughly appraised by previous studies on the regulatory
However,thisfindinghasbeenquestionedbyasubsequentstudy effectofDAoverstriatalneurons’activity[98,99].Onthisbasis,a
that did not provide evidence supporting the role of peripheral largebodyofresearchinvestigatedifα-syncanberesponsiblefor
inflammationinRBD[81].A more recent prospective case-control synaptic alterations before a significant reduction of DA levels
studyshowedanassociationbetweenperipheralbloodmonocytes occurs inmanifest PD.
andbrainimmuneanddopaminergicchangesinRBD,supporting The possibility that α-syn toxic forms cause early alterations of
the occurrence of an interplay between peripheral inflammation synapticplasticityinPDinacell-type-dependentwaywasexplored
andthe brainduringthedisease.Inparticular,thestudyrevealed withinthestriatum. Amongthevariousneuronal subtypes inthis
thattheexpressionlevelsofToll-likereceptor4onbloodmonocytes nucleus,striatalcholinergicinterneurons(ChIs)attractedattention
in RBD patients are positively correlated with nigral immune as important targets of SNpc neurons because of their synchro-
activationmeasuredby11C-PK11195PETandnegativelycorrelated nized activity as a crucial trigger for DA release from nigrostriatal
withputaminal18F-DOPAuptake[82]. terminals [100, 101]. ChIs also receive glutamatergic inputs from
cortical areas, are involved in reward-related learning processes,
Pureautonomic failure and respond to stimuli that mainly arise from the thalamostriatal
Autonomicdysfunctionisafrequentandcommondisturbancein afferents [102–104]. Thus, impaired activity of these interneurons
synucleinopathies, often appearing in the early stage of the mighthavedramatic consequenceson cognitionandmovement.
disease. Among the α-synucleinopathies, PAF is characterized by Tozzi and colleagues investigated if pathological forms of α-syn
slowly

Chunk 23:
se from the thalamostriatal
Autonomicdysfunctionisafrequentandcommondisturbancein afferents [102–104]. Thus, impaired activity of these interneurons
synucleinopathies, often appearing in the early stage of the mighthavedramatic consequenceson cognitionandmovement.
disease. Among the α-synucleinopathies, PAF is characterized by Tozzi and colleagues investigated if pathological forms of α-syn
slowlyprogressiveautonomicfailurewithoutmotordysfunctions. couldinduceearlysynapticdysfunctionsinChIsandtheirinfluence
PostmortemstudiesshowLBlocalizationintheautonomicnuclei on cognitive and motor deficits in animal models of PD, with
and substantia nigra [83]. Interestingly, a recent preclinical study different degrees of endogenous DA levels [105]. Interestingly, a
proposedanewmodelinwhichinoculationofα-synPFFsintothe verylowinvitroconcentrationofoligomericα-syn(3nM)induced
stellateandceliacgangliainducesbidirectionalspreadingofα-syn loss of LTP in ChIs, but not in spiny projection neurons (SPNs),
from the CNS to the peripheral organs via their autonomic proving a cell type-specific and dose-dependent alteration of
innervation [84]. Nevertheless, at present, no clear evidence synaptic plasticity. A similar electrophysiological alteration was
regarding the role of central and peripheral inflammation in PAF accompanied in in vivo models by motor and cognitive defects,
pathophysiology has beenprovided. and it was mechanistically attributed to α-syn oligomers directly
targetingGluN2D-containingN-methyl-d-aspartate(NMDA)recep-
tors, which are selectively expressed on ChIs, but not on SPNs.
A-SYNAND EARLYSYNAPTIC DYSFUNCTION Thus, early dysfunction of the striatal cholinergic system induced
Evidencefrombothhumanandanimalmodelshasdemonstrated by α-syn oligomers seems sufficient to initiate the impairment of
that before clear signs of neurodegeneration appear in specific cognitiveandmotoractivityintheearlyphasesofPD[105].
brain regions, other dysfunctions occur in the same neuronal SP

Chunk 24:

A-SYNAND EARLYSYNAPTIC DYSFUNCTION Thus, early dysfunction of the striatal cholinergic system induced
Evidencefrombothhumanandanimalmodelshasdemonstrated by α-syn oligomers seems sufficient to initiate the impairment of
that before clear signs of neurodegeneration appear in specific cognitiveandmotoractivityintheearlyphasesofPD[105].
brain regions, other dysfunctions occur in the same neuronal SPNs were also recently investigated for the first time for
circuitsatasynapticlevelinapparentlyintactcells.Indeed,being detectingearlysynaptictransmissionalterationsexertedbyα-syn
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
8
Fig. 3 Presynaptic and postsynaptic dysfunctions induced by intrastriatal injection of α-syn-PFFs in the rat model. Left panel: in the
corticalareas,aconsistentproportionofp-α-syn+neuronswasdetectedinα-syn-PFFs-injectedrats.Analysisofspontaneoussynapticcurrents
indicatesanincreasedfrequencyofthespontaneousexcitatorypostsynapticcurrentintargetneuronsofthedorsalstriatumthatbringstoa
stateofhyperglutamatergicactivity.Rightpanel:theSNpcinα-syn-PFFratspresentsareducednumberofdopaminergicneuronsasdisplayed
byadecreaseofTH+-immunofluorence,associatedwithanabnormalincreaseinspontaneousfiringactivity.Centerpanel:inthedorsolateral
striatum,α-syn-PFFsinjectionleadstoprofoundalterationsofthecorticostriatallong-termplasticity,intheSPNs.AsignificantdecreaseofTH+
fibersandareducedreleaseofendogenousdopaminefromSNpcterminalsarealsoobserved.
oligomers, combining multiple techniques like electrophysiology Synapticdysfunctions in other synucleinopathies
optogenetics,immunofluorescence,andmolecularandbehavioral Multiplesystematrophy.MSAmodelsarecharacterizedbyectopic
analyses[106].Highernanomolar(30nM)concentrationsofα-syn depositionofabnormalα-synpredominantlyinoligodendrocytes.
oligomersreduceNMDAreceptor-mediatedsynapticcurrentsand A recent study investigating MSA models with cognitive impair-
impair corticostriatal and thalamostriatal LTP in S

Chunk 25:
optogenetics,immunofluorescence,andmolecularandbehavioral Multiplesystematrophy.MSAmodelsarecharacterizedbyectopic
analyses[106].Highernanomolar(30nM)concentrationsofα-syn depositionofabnormalα-synpredominantlyinoligodendrocytes.
oligomersreduceNMDAreceptor-mediatedsynapticcurrentsand A recent study investigating MSA models with cognitive impair-
impair corticostriatal and thalamostriatal LTP in SPNs of both ment demonstrated that α-syn was first expressed in oligoden-
direct and indirect pathways in vitro [106]. A-syn oligomers were drocytes but then accumulated in the cytoplasm of excitatory
proven to selectively interfere with GluN2A, which is crucial for hippocampalneuronsandtheirpresynapticnerveterminals[109].
LTP induction in SPNs [107], by disturbing its localization at the These findings were associated with the onset of memory
postsynaptic site. Of interest, monoclonal antibodies against impairment.Interestingly,inthemodel,α-synoligomersincreased
oligomericformsofα-synweresufficienttopreventthereduction inthehippocampusand,inparallel,hippocampaldendriticspine
of GluN2A levels in the postsynaptic compartment and the density was decreased. Moreover, LTP was suppressed in CA1,
consequent loss ofLTP. CA3, and dentate gyrus. Accordingly, postmortem analysis of
In vivo intrastriatal injection of α-syn oligomers in experimental human MSA brain tissues showed that patients with memory
animals led to deficits in visuospatial learning, in association with impairmenthavemoreα-syninclusionsinexcitatoryhippocampal
reducedexpressionofGluN2ANMDAreceptorsubunit,indicatinga neurons along with α-syn oligomers than subjects without
selectivetargetingbyα-synoligomersbothexvivoandinvivo[106]. cognitive deficits [109].
Most recently, the concomitant pre- and postsynaptic changes DementiawithLewybodies.Progressiveaccumulationofα-syn
induced by α-syn were investigated by analyzing the effects of inthepresynapticterminalhasbeenstronglyassociatedwiththe
intrastriatal α-syn PFFs on c

Chunk 26:
 along with α-syn oligomers than subjects without
selectivetargetingbyα-synoligomersbothexvivoandinvivo[106]. cognitive deficits [109].
Most recently, the concomitant pre- and postsynaptic changes DementiawithLewybodies.Progressiveaccumulationofα-syn
induced by α-syn were investigated by analyzing the effects of inthepresynapticterminalhasbeenstronglyassociatedwiththe
intrastriatal α-syn PFFs on corticostriatal and nigral physiology. A pathogenesisof DLB.While theprecisemechanisms are not fully
specific α-syn-induced dysregulation of nigral neuron activity understood, changes in kinase pathways, particularly mitogen-
impairs, in a time-dependent manner, the two primary forms of activatedproteinkinase(MAPK)p38mayplayarole.Inparticular,
striatal synaptic plasticity, long-term depression (LTD) and LTP, arecentstudyinvestigatedtheexpressionofthep38familyinthe
before overt neurodegeneration. The defective nigral and striatal brainsofα-synoverexpressingtransgenicmiceandpatientswith
neuronal activity was accompanied by a reduced release of DA DLB. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that p38 is asso-
and increased glutamatergic transmission [108] (Fig. 3). These ciated with neurons and astroglial cells and localized to
studiesdemonstratedthatstriatalneuronalpopulationsfeaturea presynaptic terminals. However, in the α-syn transgenic mice,
concentration-dependent susceptibility to α-syn toxicity and that p38 levels were increased in astroglial cells, while in neurons, it
impairment of the functionality of the basal ganglia network in localized in the neuronal cell bodies instead of the presynaptic
synucleinopathies should be conceived as a complex emergent terminals. A similar finding was observed in DLB patients, where
phenomenonrather thanasingle-threshold event. p38alsocolocalizedwithα-synaggregates.Theseresultssuggest
These preclinical findings might also have implications for thatα-synmightinterferewiththep38pathwayandaltersynaptic
therapiesthatclearα-synaggregates(se

Chunk 27:
f the presynaptic
synucleinopathies should be conceived as a complex emergent terminals. A similar finding was observed in DLB patients, where
phenomenonrather thanasingle-threshold event. p38alsocolocalizedwithα-synaggregates.Theseresultssuggest
These preclinical findings might also have implications for thatα-synmightinterferewiththep38pathwayandaltersynaptic
therapiesthatclearα-synaggregates(seebelow).Thesetherapies functioninginDLB[110].Thisideaisfurthersupportedbyarecent
are typically viewed as potentially protective against neuronal imaging study documenting a widespread cortical reduction of
death, and require long-term assessments to reveal a beneficial synaptic density in a cohort of DLB/PD with dementia subjects
disease-modifying effect. The possibility to directly restoring usingin vivo[11C]UCB-JPET [111].
synaptic functioning could achieve an early benefit, especially if REMsleep behavior disorder.Even though thecause of RBDis
the treatment is delivered in the initial phases of the disease. unknown, multiple lines of evidence indicate that abnormal
Unfortunately, this approach, which is theoretically feasible, has inhibitorytransmissionunderliesthedisorder.Inparticular,astudy
notbeenexplored yetin clinicaltrials. ontransgenicmicewithdeficientglycineandGABAtransmission
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
9
showed that the deficits in glycine- and GABA(A)-mediated increase diagnostic accuracy [115]. Measurements of early
inhibition are associated with RBD symptoms [112]. Moreover, aggregates of α-syn, such as oligomers (o-α-syn), may favor the
another study on rats with genetically-induced alterations of the early detection of PD since oligomerization of α-syn precedes
inhibitory neurons localized within the ventromedial medulla neuronal death in the disease. For example, although several
suggeststhecrucialroleofGABA/glycineinhibitoryneuronsinthe studieshavereportedasignificantlyreducedleveloftotalα-syn(t-
developmentofRBD

Chunk 28:
may favor the
another study on rats with genetically-induced alterations of the early detection of PD since oligomerization of α-syn precedes
inhibitory neurons localized within the ventromedial medulla neuronal death in the disease. For example, although several
suggeststhecrucialroleofGABA/glycineinhibitoryneuronsinthe studieshavereportedasignificantlyreducedleveloftotalα-syn(t-
developmentofRBD.Italsohighlightsthatspecificbrainregions α-syn) in CSF of PD patients, the o-α-syn/t-α-syn ratio has been
canbevulnerabletotheα-syn-dependentdegenerationobserved revealed to be the most sensitive and specific parameter to
inRBDpatients [113]. differentiatePD fromcontrols [115].
Techniques such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), western blot, and mass spectrometry are used to detect
CLINICALIMPLICATIONS t-α-syn and its oligomeric and phosphorylated isoforms in bodily
Biomarkers fluidssuch asCSF, plasma, and saliva(see Table2).
In recent years, relevant efforts have been made to develop Novelmethodologicalapproachestomeasuringproteinaggre-
disease-modifying therapies for PD targeting α-syn. These efforts gates in biological fluids have been reported, such as real-time
have been limited by the difficulty in diagnosing PD accurately, quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) and protein-misfolding
especially in the early phases of the disease. Moreover, the cyclic amplification (PMCA). This approach detects different
problemsintheidentificationofthedifferentclinicalphenotypes, protein aggregates and relies on the amyloid-seeding capacity
as well as in the distinction of PD from other parkinsonian of misfolded α-syn seeds to induce recombinant native α-syn to
syndromes, have often hampered accurate patient stratification aggregate into a measurable signal. An interesting study has
forclinical trialsof therapeuticapproaches targeting α-syn. cross-validated the two seeding assays, RT-QuIC and PMCA, to
Recently, significant progress has been made in biomarker measure o-α-syn

Chunk 29:
other parkinsonian of misfolded α-syn seeds to induce recombinant native α-syn to
syndromes, have often hampered accurate patient stratification aggregate into a measurable signal. An interesting study has
forclinical trialsof therapeuticapproaches targeting α-syn. cross-validated the two seeding assays, RT-QuIC and PMCA, to
Recently, significant progress has been made in biomarker measure o-α-syn in the CSF of PD patients and healthy controls
discoverywithafocusonα-syn.Newassayshavebeenemployed [116],describingreliableandreproducibleresultsforthediagnosis
toinvestigatetheincreasingcomplexityofα-syn,consideringthe ofPD.ArecentstudyusingPMCAshowedthatthefeaturesofthe
distinct forms of this molecule existing in the biofluids and α-synaggregatesintheCSFenablethedifferentiationofPDfrom
peripheral tissues during the natural history of the disease. MSA [117]. The authors also observed that the properties of CSF
Moreover, since growing clinical and experimental findings aggregates were similar to the aggregates amplified from
support the notion that PD pathogenesis begins several years thebrain.
before motor symptoms manifest and clinical diagnosis is made, A growing body of evidence also highlights theimportance of
a-syn-related biomarkers might provide a unique chance for measuringα-syninplasma-derivedextracellularvesicles,withthe
treatment before overt massive dopaminergic denervation [114] possibility of isolating thoseof neuronalderivation [118,119].
(Fig. 4). However, presymptomatic identification requires a novel Non-motor symptoms such as hyposmia, urinary and gastro-
methodology for objective and accurate early diagnosis. In intestinal dysfunctions in PD patients have stimulated the search
addition,atpresent,nosinglebiomarkerhasshowntheadequate for α-syn-related biomarkers in peripheral sites and tissues
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity required for routine clinical implicated in these dysfunctions [120]. Materials from the skin,
use. Conversely, a combinati

Chunk 30:
odology for objective and accurate early diagnosis. In intestinal dysfunctions in PD patients have stimulated the search
addition,atpresent,nosinglebiomarkerhasshowntheadequate for α-syn-related biomarkers in peripheral sites and tissues
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity required for routine clinical implicated in these dysfunctions [120]. Materials from the skin,
use. Conversely, a combination of multiple biomarkers seems to olfactory and gut mucosa, and salivary glands have been
Fig.4 HypotheticalsequencesofsignsandbiomarkersinPDstages.Inthehealthypresymptomaticstage,thenumberofdopaminergic
cellsofSNpcslowlydecreases(lightbluecurve),andclinicalsymptomsareabsent.InprodromalPD,neurodegenerationstartswitharapid
decrease in nigral neurons survival rate (light blue), non-motor symptoms, and signs of neurodegeneration are evident; peripheral
inflammatory markers begin to increase (red dashed line). Subsequently, there is an increase in inflammatory markers, which decreases
graduallyintheearlymotorstage(reddashedline).Theoligoα-syn/totalα-synratio(graydottedline)iselevatedinbothprodromalandearly
motor stages. Inaddition, theevolutionof the motor impairment is represented bya green curve, especially during thelate motor stage,
when long-term complications of dopaminergic therapy emerge (motor fluctuations and dyskinesia). The dotted lines represent a
hypotheticalestimation.Thedurationofthehealthystageisunknown,whiletheprodromalstagecanrangebetween10and15years.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
10
Table2. SummaryoftechniquesofsynucleinspeciesquantificationindifferentspecimensandfindingsinPD.
Specimen Methods Analyte Diagnosticmeaning
CSF •ELISA,Electrochemiluminescence,xMAP t-α-syn ↓insynucleinopathies,↑asaspecificmarker
technology,Single-moleculearraytechnology p-α-syn ofsynapticdamage
o-α-syn ↑inPDthancontrols,betterdiagnosticyield
ifcombinedwithotherα-synspecies
↑inPDthancontrols,betterdiagnosticyield
ifcombinedwithotherα-synspec

Chunk 31:
esquantificationindifferentspecimensandfindingsinPD.
Specimen Methods Analyte Diagnosticmeaning
CSF •ELISA,Electrochemiluminescence,xMAP t-α-syn ↓insynucleinopathies,↑asaspecificmarker
technology,Single-moleculearraytechnology p-α-syn ofsynapticdamage
o-α-syn ↑inPDthancontrols,betterdiagnosticyield
ifcombinedwithotherα-synspecies
↑inPDthancontrols,betterdiagnosticyield
ifcombinedwithotherα-synspecies
•Real-TimeQuaking-InducedConversion(RT- misfoldedα-syn Canaccuratelydetectα-synseedingactivity
QuIC),Protein-MisfoldingCyclic acrossthespectrumofLB-relateddisorders
Amplification(PMCA) Higherseedingactivityofpathologically
aggregatedα-syninDLBthanPD
•Nanoscaleflowcytometry α-syn–containing Totalα-syn–positiveandaggregatedα-
extracellular syn–positiveEVaresignificantlylowerin
vesicles(EVs) patientswithPDthancontrols
Blood •ELISA t-α-syn Notconclusiveresultsfordifferentiating
plasmao-α-syn controlsfromdiseasedgroups,possible
plasmap-α-syn utilityasamarkerofdiseaseprogression
↑inPD
↑inPD
•Nanoscaleflowcytometry α-syn–containing ↑inPD
extracellular
vesicles(EVs)
Saliva,tears •ELISA t-α-syn Notstatisticallysignificantindistinguishing
o-α-syn PDfromcontrols
o-α-syn/t-α-syn ↑inPDthancontrols,correlateswithdisease
duration
↑inPDthancontrols,increasedin
advancedstages
Skin •Immunohistochemicalanalysis t-α-syn ↑inPDandsynucleinopathiesthan
p-α-syn tauopathiesandcontrols
Skinα-syndepositsdifferinclinicalvariants
ofsynucleinopathy
Retina •Fluorescenceimmunohistochemistry p-α-syn intheretinaofPDpatientsinparallelwith
thatinthebrain,includingbeforeclinical
onsetofthedisease.
Itcorrelateswithclinicaldiseaseseverity
Gutmucosa •Immunohistochemicalanalysis t-α-syn Conflictingresults.Morerecentstudiesdo
p-α-syn notfindsignificantdiagnosticvaluein
discriminatingPDpatientsfromcontrols
Gonadal •Immunohistochemicalanalysis p-α-syn Abundanceofp-α-syninthetesticularand
tissue ovariantissueoftwoPDpatients
investigated with some important observations. However, these Concerning active immunizatio

Chunk 32:
clinicaldiseaseseverity
Gutmucosa •Immunohistochemicalanalysis t-α-syn Conflictingresults.Morerecentstudiesdo
p-α-syn notfindsignificantdiagnosticvaluein
discriminatingPDpatientsfromcontrols
Gonadal •Immunohistochemicalanalysis p-α-syn Abundanceofp-α-syninthetesticularand
tissue ovariantissueoftwoPDpatients
investigated with some important observations. However, these Concerning active immunization against α-syn, AFFiRiS (AC
findings should be replicated and validated across several Immune recently acquired the α-syn antibody program), devel-
laboratories and large patient cohorts before reaching clinical oped2 peptide vaccines, AFFITOPE® PD01Aand PD03A. The first
use[121]. humanphase1randomizedstudyrecruitedsubjectswithearlyPD
andMSAforbothdrugs.Patientsrandomlyreceivedvaccinations
Therapeutic approaches oflow-orhigh-dosePD01AorPD030A,respectively.Bothdosesof
A-syndepositionandassociatedimmuneresponsesmayoccurin the drugs were well tolerated. Both vaccines showed a clear
different phases of the natural history of PD, the latter being an immune response against α-syn targeted epitopes [123–125].
indirecteffectoftheformer,inaviciouscircle.Forinstance,inthe Another synthetic peptide-based vaccine, UB-312, is currently
prodromal stages, disturbances such as hyposmia, constipation, beingtested inhealthycontrols andearly PD patients.
anddepressionmaynotbedirectlylinkedtotheeffectofα-synon Regarding passive immunization against α-syn, encouraging
the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system but indirectly to other preclinical findings were published showing a reduction in α-syn
molecular processes, such as the derangement of dopaminergic aggregates in the brain, associated with decreased motor and
circuitry other than the nigro-striatal pathway or other neuro- cognitive alterations [126, 127]. Roche (Basel, Switzerland) and
transmitters and distinct inflammatory processes [122]. Prothena (Dublin, Ireland) conducted a multicenter, randomized,
Because the corruption of α-syn contr

Chunk 33:
r processes, such as the derangement of dopaminergic aggregates in the brain, associated with decreased motor and
circuitry other than the nigro-striatal pathway or other neuro- cognitive alterations [126, 127]. Roche (Basel, Switzerland) and
transmitters and distinct inflammatory processes [122]. Prothena (Dublin, Ireland) conducted a multicenter, randomized,
Because the corruption of α-syn contributes to defects in double-blindphase2trialinpatientswithearlyPDtoevaluatethe
neurotransmission and neurodegeneration, several studies in efficacy of Prasinezumab (PRX002) vs. placebo, which failed to
animal models and patients have tested drugs to target α-syn meet the primary endpoint [128, 129]. However, the study was
(Table 3). The two main approaches are immunization and extendeduntilSeptember2026sinceapost-hocanalysisrevealed
inhibition of α-syn aggregation. Immunotherapies act in two a slower disease progression in the treated arm. Moreover,
ways: active immunization, in which the immune system is another multicenter, randomized, double-blind phase 2B trial is
stimulated to produce antibodies against α-syn, and passive ongoing to evaluate the efficacy of Prasinezumab in slowing
immunization, in which direct administration of antibodies is disease progression. Currently, the safety and pharmacokinetic
provided. profiles of two other drugs, MEDI1341 and lu-AF82422 are being
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

.noitagerggagnitibihnironoitazinummievissaproevitcaaivnys-αgnitegratyllacfiicepssgurdnostneitapDPnislairtlacinilC
.3elbaT
emoctuO
retomorP
msinahceM
sutatS
/tratS
eltiT
esahpTCR
DITCN
gurD
noitcafo
etadnoitelpmoc
noitazinummievitcA
ytefasdnaytilibarelotdooG
GAsirfifA
-editpeP
detelpmoC
71–2102lirpA2
ytefaSdnaytilibareloT
IesahP
99086510TCN
suoenatucbusfo
desab
5102tsuguA
suoenatucbuSfo
A10DP®EPOTIFFA
.latecloV(noitartsinimda
eniccav
owTfonoitartsinimdA
)]321[
®EPOTIFFAfosesoD
ylraEniA10DP
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
ytefasdnaytilibarelotdooG
GAsirfifA
-ed

Chunk 34:
atS
/tratS
eltiT
esahpTCR
DITCN
gurD
noitcafo
etadnoitelpmoc
noitazinummievitcA
ytefasdnaytilibarelotdooG
GAsirfifA
-editpeP
detelpmoC
71–2102lirpA2
ytefaSdnaytilibareloT
IesahP
99086510TCN
suoenatucbusfo
desab
5102tsuguA
suoenatucbuSfo
A10DP®EPOTIFFA
.latecloV(noitartsinimda
eniccav
owTfonoitartsinimdA
)]321[
®EPOTIFFAfosesoD
ylraEniA10DP
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
ytefasdnaytilibarelotdooG
GAsirfifA
-editpeP
detelpmoC
13–4102rebotcO71
gnissessAydutS
IesahP
43476220TCN
suoenatucbusfo
desab
6102rebotcO
ytefaSdnaytilibareloT
A30DP®EPOTIFFA
.lateeweoP(noitartsinimda
eniccav
niA30DP®EPOTIFFAfo
)]421[
ylraEhtiWstneitaP esaesiDs’nosnikraP
)110FFA(
ytefasdnaytilibarelotdooG
GAsirfifA
-editpeP
detelpmoC
5–4102rebotcO12
ytefaSgnissessAydutS
IesahP
98407220TCN
®EPOTIFFA
suoenatucbusfo
desab
7102enuJ
citueparehTdna
A10DP
renssieM(noitartsinimda
eniccav
®EPOTIFFAfoytivitcA
A30DPdna
)]521[.late
niA30DPdnaA10DP ASMylraEhtiWstneitaP
)900FFA(
–
detinU
-editpeP
ton,evitcA
22–9102tsuguA92
ni213-BUfoydutS
IesahP
81357040TCN
213-BU
.dtLecneicsorueN
desab
gnitiurcer
3202yraurbeF
stnapicitraPyhtlaeH
B-A
eniccav
esaesiDs’nosnikraPdna
stneitaP
noitazinummievissaP
yramirpteemotdeliaF
aL-nnamffoH
lanolconoM
ton-evitcA
72–7102enuJ72
ehtetaulavEotydutS
IIesahP
94100130TCN
bamuzenisarP
,revewoh,tniopdne
anehtorP&ehcoR
ydobitna
gnitiurcer
9102rebmevoN
foycacfifE
)200XRP(
rotomrewolsfoecnedive
secneicsoiB
detcerid
41otdednetxe(
bamuzenisarP
dnanoitaroireted
detimiL
tsniaga
)6202rebmetpeS
ni)200XRP/5106407OR(
noisnetxelairttneuqesnoc
detagergga
ylraEhtiWstnapicitraP
onagaP;]821[.latecivoknaJ(
-C(–nys-α
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
)]921[.late
)sunimret
)ANEDASAP(
–
gnitiurceR
22–1202yaM5
ehtetaulavEotydutSA
BIIesahP
13377740TCN
bamuzenisarP
4202yraunaJ
foytefaSdnaycacfifE
)200XRP(
suonevartnI
nibamuzenisarP
ylraEhtiWstnapicitraP
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
)AVODAP(
dnayramirpteemotdeliaF
negoiB
lanolconoM
detanimreT
92–8102yraunaJ01
,ycacfifEehtgnitaulavE
IIesahP
32581330TCN
bamenapniC
gnaL(stniopdneyradnoces
ydobitna
1202

Chunk 35:
nosnikraP
)]921[.late
)sunimret
)ANEDASAP(
–
gnitiurceR
22–1202yaM5
ehtetaulavEotydutSA
BIIesahP
13377740TCN
bamuzenisarP
4202yraunaJ
foytefaSdnaycacfifE
)200XRP(
suonevartnI
nibamuzenisarP
ylraEhtiWstnapicitraP
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
)AVODAP(
dnayramirpteemotdeliaF
negoiB
lanolconoM
detanimreT
92–8102yraunaJ01
,ycacfifEehtgnitaulavE
IIesahP
32581330TCN
bamenapniC
gnaL(stniopdneyradnoces
ydobitna
1202lirpA
,ytefaS
)450BIIB(
)]231[.late
detcerid
dna,scitenikocamrahP
tsniaga
foscimanydocamrahP
detagergga
stnapicitraPni450BIIB
-N(–nys-α
s’nosnikraPhtiW
)sunimret
)KRAPS(esaesiD
P.Calabresietal.
11
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

deunitnoc
.3elbaT
emoctuO
retomorP
msinahceM
sutatS
/tratS
eltiT
esahpTCR
DITCN
gurD
noitcafo
etadnoitelpmoc
–
aceneZartsA
lanolconoM
detelpmoC
5–0202tsuguA4
gnidnecsAelpitluM
IesahP
48494440TCN
1431IDEM
ydobitna
2202yraunaJ
foydutSesoD
detcerid
stneitaPni1431IDEM
llatsniaga
s’nosnikraPhtiW
-αfosmrof
esaesiD
-C(–nys )sunimret
ytilibarelotdnaytefasdooG
eivbbA
lanolconoM
nwardhtiW
61–0202hcraM3
ehtetaulavEotydutSA
IesahP
59672140TCN
5080-VBBA
irullaK(stcejbusyhtlaehni
ydobitna
cigetarts(
0202enuJ
ytilibareloTdnaytefaS
)1202.late
detcerid
)noitaredisnoc
ni5080-VBBAfo
tsniaga
htiWstneitaP
detagergga
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
nys-α
–
S/AkcebdnuL.H
lanolconoM
detelpmoC
62–8102yluJ52
yhtlaeHni22428FAuL
IesahP
96511630TCN
22428FAuL
ydobitna
1202yluJ
dnaesenapaJ-noN
detcerid
dnastcejbuSesenapaJ
llatsniaga
htiWstneitaPni
-αfosmrof
esaesiDs’nosnikraP
–
dna-C(–nys
gnitiurceR
rebmevoN01
22428FAuLfoydutSA
IesahP
67440150TCN
22428FAuL
)sunimret-N
3202tsuguA03–1202
htiWstnapicitraPni
metsySelpitluM
)TELUMA(yhportA
noitbinihninoitagerggA
–
HbmGGADOM
lareneG
gnitiurceR
rebmeceD22
ehtssessAotydutSA
IesahP
56258640TCN
b831elnA
forotibihni
2202rebmeceD–0202
,ytilibareloT,ytefaS
nietorp
dnascitenikocamrahP
noitagergga
foscimanydocamrahP s’nosnikraPnib831elna
esaesiD
ytilibarelotdnaytefasdooG
eroporueN
forotibihnI
detelpmoC
91–9102yaM6
otydutS1esahP
bIesahP


Chunk 36:
3–1202
htiWstnapicitraPni
metsySelpitluM
)TELUMA(yhportA
noitbinihninoitagerggA
–
HbmGGADOM
lareneG
gnitiurceR
rebmeceD22
ehtssessAotydutSA
IesahP
56258640TCN
b831elnA
forotibihni
2202rebmeceD–0202
,ytilibareloT,ytefaS
nietorp
dnascitenikocamrahP
noitagergga
foscimanydocamrahP s’nosnikraPnib831elna
esaesiD
ytilibarelotdnaytefasdooG
eroporueN
forotibihnI
detelpmoC
91–9102yaM6
otydutS1esahP
bIesahP
26957840TCN
9950BCU
stneitapDPdnaCHhtobni
;.cnIseiparehT
nys-α
0202yraurbeF
dnaytefaSehtetaulavE
)11-002TPN(
)gniognoydutsnoisnetxe(
sitravoN
gnidlofsim
ni9950BCUytilibareloT
)]631[.latetimS(
slacituecamrahP
dna
stneitapDP
–
,noitaroproC
noitagergga
gnitiurceR
rebmeceD03
ehtetaulavEotydutS
IIesahP
68185640TCN
9950BCU
A.SBCU
3202yluJ81–0202
,ytefaS,ycacfifE
)11-002TPN(
dnaytilibareloT
foscitenikocamrahP
ni9950BCUlarO
ylraEhtiWstnapicitraP
DPegats
P.Calabresietal.
12
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
13
studied in phase I trials. Abbvie, instead, withdrew ABBV-0805 2022. We further examined the reference lists from relevant
phaseItrialforstrategicconsiderations,althoughitwasshownto articles. A combination of keywords related to alpha-synuclein,
have good tolerability in healthy subjects [130]. Cinpanemab synaptic plasticity and Parkinson’s disease was used: “alpha-
(BIIB054) from Biogen (Cambridge, MA), is another monoclonal synuclein”, “neuroinflammation”, “neurodegeneration”, “Lewy
antibody that targets the N-terminal of α-syn. A phase I study in bodies”, “Parkinson’s disease”, “striatal dopaminergic transmis-
healthy controls and PD patients showed Cinpanemab favorable sion”, “synucleinopathies”, “synaptopathy”, “synaptic plasticity”,
safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic profiles [131]. However, “presynaptic”,“postsynaptic,“toxicity”,“misfolded”,“aggregation”,
thesubsequentphaseIItrialwasterminatedbecauseCinpanemab “oligomers”,“fibrils”,“animal models”,“mechanisms”,“Lewy body
did not improve scores on the motor rating scale [132]. I

Chunk 37:
wed Cinpanemab favorable sion”, “synucleinopathies”, “synaptopathy”, “synaptic plasticity”,
safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic profiles [131]. However, “presynaptic”,“postsynaptic,“toxicity”,“misfolded”,“aggregation”,
thesubsequentphaseIItrialwasterminatedbecauseCinpanemab “oligomers”,“fibrils”,“animal models”,“mechanisms”,“Lewy body
did not improve scores on the motor rating scale [132]. It is dementia”, “multiple system atrophy”, “pure autonomic failure”,
unknown if Cinpanemab reduced the abundance of α-syn “REM behavior disorder”. We then selected the most relevant
aggregates.Indeed,itispossiblethatN-andC-terminalepitopes papers with particular attention to studies dealing with alpha-
are differentially exposed in aggregated α-syn, as demonstrated synucleinearliestpathologicaleffectspublishedwithinthepast5
in vitro [133]. This study highlights the need for biomarkers of years, although seminal older studies were included for their
aggregatedα-syntodetermineifputativetherapiesengageα-syn. importance.Thefinalreferencelistwasgeneratedonthebasisof
A promising line of research is the development of oligomer relevancetothetopicscoveredinthisreview.Clinicaltrialsinthe
modulators. Among these drugs, an aggregation inhibitor, Table 3 were identified through searches in ClinicalTrials.gov, a
anle138b, has been first investigated. In in vitro and in vivo resourceprovidedbytheU.S.NationalLibraryofMedicine,using
experiments, anle138b blocked the formation of pathological the term “alpha-synuclein”. We applied the following filters to
aggregates of prion protein and of α-syn and inhibited oligomer search results: “not yet recruiting”, “recruiting”, “active, not
accumulation, neuronal degeneration, and disease progression recruiting”.
[134]. Evotec (Nottingham, UK) is currently conducting a double-
blind, placebo-controlled, multiple ascending dose phase I study
inpatientswithmildtomoderatePD.Anotherdrug,UCB0599(aka DATAAVAILABILITY
NPT200-11), inhibits misfolding and ag

Chunk 38:
d inhibited oligomer search results: “not yet recruiting”, “recruiting”, “active, not
accumulation, neuronal degeneration, and disease progression recruiting”.
[134]. Evotec (Nottingham, UK) is currently conducting a double-
blind, placebo-controlled, multiple ascending dose phase I study
inpatientswithmildtomoderatePD.Anotherdrug,UCB0599(aka DATAAVAILABILITY
NPT200-11), inhibits misfolding and aggregation of normal α-syn Datasharingnotapplicabletothisarticleasnodatasetsweregeneratedoranalyzed
[135], showed a good safety and tolerability profile, and is duringthecurrentstudy.
currently being tested by Neuropore Therapies Inc (San Diego,
CA),inphase 2clinical trial inearly PDpatients [136].
AsshowninTable3,noneofthemoleculestestedinaphaseII REFERENCES
trialhaveyetmettheirprimaryendpoint.Thiscouldhaveseveral
1. Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E, Ide SE, Dehejia A, Dutra A, et al.
possible explanations. First of all, the timing: the degenerative Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s
processes start years before the onset of symptoms. Therefore, disease.Science.1997;276:2045–7.
patients included in trials could have initiated the treatment too 2. SpillantiniMG,SchmidtML,LeeVM,TrojanowskiJQ,JakesR,GoedertM.Alpha-
late,oncemostofthedamagehadalreadyoccurred.Secondly,α- synucleininLewybodies.Nature.1997;388:839–40.
syn aggregation and spreading are one but not the only 3. GoldsteinDS,IsonakaR,LamotteG,KaufmannH.Differentphenoconversion
pathogenicmechanismsunderlyingPDinitiationandprogression. pathways in pure autonomic failure with versus without Lewy bodies. Clin
AutonRes.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10286-021-00829-y2021.
As a consequence, it could not be enough to target only one of
4. McKeithIG,BoeveBF,DicksonDW,HallidayG,TaylorJP,WeintraubD,etal.
these factors, but a combination of therapeutic approaches with
DiagnosisandmanagementofdementiawithLewybodies:fourthconsensus
different targets could be more powerful. Finally, the trial

Chunk 39:
without Lewy bodies. Clin
AutonRes.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10286-021-00829-y2021.
As a consequence, it could not be enough to target only one of
4. McKeithIG,BoeveBF,DicksonDW,HallidayG,TaylorJP,WeintraubD,etal.
these factors, but a combination of therapeutic approaches with
DiagnosisandmanagementofdementiawithLewybodies:fourthconsensus
different targets could be more powerful. Finally, the trial design reportoftheDLBConsortium.Neurology.2017;89:88–100.
could not have been appropriate to highlight, for example, a 5. Krismer F, Wenning GK. Multiple system atrophy: insights into a rare and
slowing of symptoms progression in early PD patients for too debilitatingmovementdisorder.NatRevNeurol.2017;13:232–43.
shortfollow-uporawrongchoiceofprimaryendpointmeasures. 6. BurréJ,SharmaM,SüdhofTC.Cellbiologyandpathophysiologyofα-synuclein.Cold
Furthering our understanding of how abnormal α-syn impacts SpringHarbPerspectMed.2018;8.https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a024091.
neurotransmissioncouldalsohelpdevelopnewtherapeutics. For 7. BartelsT,ChoiJG,SelkoeDJ.alpha-Synucleinoccursphysiologicallyasahelically
example, targeting metabotropic receptors or transporters that
foldedtetramerthatresistsaggregation.Nature.2011;477:107–10.
8. FuscoG,DeSimoneA,GopinathT,VostrikovV,VendruscoloM,DobsonCM,
controlthereleaseofneurotransmittersthatareperturbedearlyin
etal.Directobservationofthethreeregionsinalpha-synucleinthatdetermine
PD could prevent neurodegeneration. Targeting genes that
itsmembrane-boundbehaviour.NatCommun.2014;5:3827.
impact α-syn transport and turnover, such as LRRK2 and GBA 9. VamvacaK,VollesMJ,LansburyPTJr.ThefirstN-terminalaminoacidsofalpha-
could also showpromise inpreventing theprogression ofPD. synucleinareessentialforalpha-helicalstructureformationinvitroandmem-
branebindinginyeast.JMolBiol.2009;389:413–24.
10. NielsenMS,VorumH,LinderssonE,JensenPH.Ca2+bindingtoalpha-synuclein
CONCLUSIONS regulatesligandbindingandoligomerization.JBiolChem.2001;276:22680–4.
Moretha

Chunk 40:
VamvacaK,VollesMJ,LansburyPTJr.ThefirstN-terminalaminoacidsofalpha-
could also showpromise inpreventing theprogression ofPD. synucleinareessentialforalpha-helicalstructureformationinvitroandmem-
branebindinginyeast.JMolBiol.2009;389:413–24.
10. NielsenMS,VorumH,LinderssonE,JensenPH.Ca2+bindingtoalpha-synuclein
CONCLUSIONS regulatesligandbindingandoligomerization.JBiolChem.2001;276:22680–4.
Morethantwentyyearsofinvestigationontheroleofα-syninPD 11. LautenschlagerJ,StephensAD,FuscoG,StrohlF,CurryN,ZacharopoulouM,
andthedevelopmentofpotentialstrategiestotargetthismolecule etal.C-terminalcalciumbindingofalpha-synucleinmodulatessynapticvesicle
interaction.NatCommun.2018;9:712.
tocurethediseaserepresentalongstory.Itmightsomehowrecall
12. PappMI,LantosPL.Thedistributionofoligodendroglialinclusionsinmultiple
toourmindthelongjourneythathasrepresentedthestoryofthe
systematrophyanditsrelevancetoclinicalsymptomatology.Brain.1994;117(Pt
discovery of the central role of DA in PD and the subsequent 2):235–43.
development of successful symptomatic DA-based therapies. It is 13. LukKC,KehmVM,ZhangB,O’BrienP,TrojanowskiJQ,LeeVM.Intracerebral
also possible that targeting only α-syn might not be sufficient to inoculationofpathologicalalpha-synucleininitiatesarapidlyprogressiveneu-
modify the natural history of the disease, and other molecular rodegenerativealpha-synucleinopathyinmice.JExpMed.2012;209:975–86.
culprits must be identified and targeted. Similarly, we now know 14. RecasensA,DehayB,BoveJ,Carballo-CarbajalI,DoveroS,Perez-VillalbaA,etal.
that efforts should be made to identify α-syn-related precocious Lewy body extracts from Parkinson disease brains trigger alpha-synuclein
mechanismscontributingtotheinitiationandpropagationofthe pathology and neurodegeneration in mice and monkeys. Ann Neurol.
disease,suchassynaptopathyandinflammation. 2014;75:351–62.
15. KurzA,DoubleKL,Lastres-BeckerI,TozziA,TantucciM,BockhartV,etal.A53T-
alpha-synuclein overexpression impairs dopamine signalin

Chunk 41:
lated precocious Lewy body extracts from Parkinson disease brains trigger alpha-synuclein
mechanismscontributingtotheinitiationandpropagationofthe pathology and neurodegeneration in mice and monkeys. Ann Neurol.
disease,suchassynaptopathyandinflammation. 2014;75:351–62.
15. KurzA,DoubleKL,Lastres-BeckerI,TozziA,TantucciM,BockhartV,etal.A53T-
alpha-synuclein overexpression impairs dopamine signaling and striatal
synapticplasticityinoldmice.PLoSOne.2010;5:e11464.
SEARCHSTRATEGY ANDSELECTION CRITERIA 16. Ulusoy A, Decressac M, Kirik D, Bjorklund A. Viral vector-mediated over-
WesearchedPubMedbetweenNovember2020andAugust2022 expression of alpha-synuclein as a progressive modelof Parkinson’s disease.
for articles published in English from 11 Nov 1983, to 31 August ProgBrainRes.2010;184:89–111.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
14
17. Kumari P, Ghosh D, Vanas A, Fleischmann Y, Wiegand T, Jeschke G, et al. 44. LudtmannMH,AngelovaPR,NinkinaNN,GandhiS,BuchmanVL,AbramovAY.
Structural insightsintoalpha-synucleinmonomer-fibrilinteractions. ProcNatl Monomericalpha-synucleinexertsaphysiologicalroleonbrainATPsynthase.J
AcadSciUSA.2021;118.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2012171118. Neurosci.2016;36:10510–21.
18. VirdiGS,ChoiML,EvansJR,YaoZ,AthaudaD,StrohbueckerS,etal.Protein 45. DiMaioR,BarrettPJ,HoffmanEK,BarrettCW,ZharikovA,BorahA,etal.alpha-
aggregation and calcium dysregulation are hallmarks of familial Parkinson’s Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein import in Par-
diseaseinmidbraindopaminergicneurons.NPJParkinsonsDis.2022;8:162. kinson’sdisease.SciTranslMed.2016;8:342ra78.
19. MaroteauxL,CampanelliJT,SchellerRH.Synuclein:aneuron-specificprotein 46. PlotegherN,GrattonE,BubaccoL.NumberandBrightnessanalysisofalpha-
localized to the nucleus and presynaptic nerve terminal. J Neurosci. synuclein oligomerization and the associated mitochondrial morphology
1988;8:2804–15. alterationsinlivecells.BiochimBiophysActa.2014;1840:2014

Chunk 42:
. kinson’sdisease.SciTranslMed.2016;8:342ra78.
19. MaroteauxL,CampanelliJT,SchellerRH.Synuclein:aneuron-specificprotein 46. PlotegherN,GrattonE,BubaccoL.NumberandBrightnessanalysisofalpha-
localized to the nucleus and presynaptic nerve terminal. J Neurosci. synuclein oligomerization and the associated mitochondrial morphology
1988;8:2804–15. alterationsinlivecells.BiochimBiophysActa.2014;1840:2014–24.
20. LiWW,YangR,GuoJC,RenHM,ZhaXL,ChengJS,etal.Localizationofalpha- 47. LudtmannMHR,AngelovaPR,HorrocksMH,ChoiML,RodriguesM,BaevAY,
synuclein to mitochondria within midbrain of mice. Neuroreport. etal.alpha-synucleinoligomersinteractwithATPsynthaseandopentheper-
2007;18:1543–6. meabilitytransitionporeinParkinson’sdisease.NatCommun.2018;9:2293.
21. Hoozemans JJ, van Haastert ES, Eikelenboom P, de Vos RA, Rozemuller JM, 48. GuZ,NakamuraT,YaoD,ShiZQ,LiptonSA.Nitrosativeandoxidativestress
ScheperW.ActivationoftheunfoldedproteinresponseinParkinson’sdisease. links dysfunctional ubiquitination to Parkinson’s disease. Cell Death Differ.
BiochemBiophysResCommun.2007;354:707–11. 2005;12:1202–4.
22. GosaviN,LeeHJ,LeeJS,PatelS,LeeSJ.Golgifragmentationoccursinthecells 49. BurbullaLF,SongP,MazzulliJR,ZampeseE,WongYC,JeonS,etal.Dopamine
with prefibrillar alpha-synuclein aggregates and precedes the formation of oxidation mediates mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson’s
fibrillarinclusion.JBiolChem.2002;277:48984–92. disease.Science.2017;357:1255–61.
23. LeeHJ,KhoshaghidehF,PatelS,LeeSJ.Clearanceofalpha-synucleinoligomeric 50. FearnleyJM,LeesAJ.AgeingandParkinson’sdisease:substantianigraregional
intermediates via the lysosomal degradation pathway. J Neurosci. selectivity. Brain. 1991;114(Pt 5):2283–301. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/
2004;24:1888–96. 114.5.2283.
24. Burre J,Sharma M, TsetsenisT,BuchmanV,Etherton MR,SudhofTC.Alpha- 51. BeachTG,AdlerCH,LueL,SueLI,BachalakuriJ,Henry-WatsonJ,etal.Unified
synuclein promotes SNARE-complex assembly in vivo and in vitro. Science.

Chunk 43:
tianigraregional
intermediates via the lysosomal degradation pathway. J Neurosci. selectivity. Brain. 1991;114(Pt 5):2283–301. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/
2004;24:1888–96. 114.5.2283.
24. Burre J,Sharma M, TsetsenisT,BuchmanV,Etherton MR,SudhofTC.Alpha- 51. BeachTG,AdlerCH,LueL,SueLI,BachalakuriJ,Henry-WatsonJ,etal.Unified
synuclein promotes SNARE-complex assembly in vivo and in vitro. Science. stagingsystemforLewybodydisorders:correlationwithnigrostriataldegen-
2010;329:1663–7. eration, cognitive impairment and motor dysfunction. Acta Neuropathol.
25. ShenH,PirruccelloM,DeCamilliPSnapShot:membranecurvaturesensorsand 2009;117:613–34.
generators.Cell.2012;150:1300,e1-2.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.08.017. 52. BolamJP,PissadakiEK.Livingontheedgewithtoomanymouthstofeed:why
26. Bridi JC, Hirth F. Mechanisms of alpha-Synuclein Induced Synaptopathy in dopamineneuronsdie.MovDisord.2012;27:1478–83.
Parkinson’sDisease.FrontNeurosci.2018;12:80. 53. HendersonMX,CornblathEJ,DarwichA,ZhangB,BrownH,GathaganRJ,etal.
27. SunJ,WangL,BaoH,PremiS,DasU,ChapmanER,etal.Functionalcooperation Spreadofα-synucleinpathologythroughthebrainconnectomeismodulated
ofα-synucleinandVAMP2insynapticvesiclerecycling.ProcNatlAcadSciUsa by selective vulnerability and predicted by network analysis. Nat Neurosci.
2019;116:11113–5. 2019;22:1248–57.
28. MurphyDD,RueterSM,TrojanowskiJQ,LeeVM.Synucleinsaredevelopmentally 54. ZeighamiY,FereshtehnejadSM,DadarM,CollinsDL,PostumaRB,MišićB,etal.
expressed,andalpha-synucleinregulatesthesizeofthepresynapticvesicular Aclinical-anatomicalsignatureofParkinson’sdiseaseidentifiedwithpartialleast
poolinprimaryhippocampalneurons.JNeurosci.2000;20:3214–20. squaresandmagneticresonanceimaging.Neuroimage.2019;190:69–78.
29. LarsenKE,SchmitzY,TroyerMD,MosharovE,DietrichP,QuaziAZ,etal.Alpha- 55. Fereshtehnejad SM, Zeighami Y, Dagher A, Postuma RB. Clinical criteria for
synuclein overexpression in PC12 and chromaffin cells impairs catecholamine subtypingParkinson’sdiseas

Chunk 44:
identifiedwithpartialleast
poolinprimaryhippocampalneurons.JNeurosci.2000;20:3214–20. squaresandmagneticresonanceimaging.Neuroimage.2019;190:69–78.
29. LarsenKE,SchmitzY,TroyerMD,MosharovE,DietrichP,QuaziAZ,etal.Alpha- 55. Fereshtehnejad SM, Zeighami Y, Dagher A, Postuma RB. Clinical criteria for
synuclein overexpression in PC12 and chromaffin cells impairs catecholamine subtypingParkinson’sdisease:biomarkersandlongitudinalprogression.Brain.
releasebyinterferingwithalatestepinexocytosis.JNeurosci.2006;26:11915–22. 2017;140:1959–76.
30. VargasKJ,MakaniS,DavisT,WestphalCH,CastilloPE,ChandraSS.Synucleins 56. ZaccaiJ,BrayneC,McKeithI,MatthewsF,IncePG.MrcCognitiveFunctionANS.
regulate the kinetics of synaptic vesicle endocytosis. J Neurosci. Patternsandstagesofalpha-synucleinopathy:Relevanceinapopulation-based
2014;34:9364–76. cohort.Neurology.2008;70:1042–8.
31. Surmeier DJ, Obeso JA, Halliday GM. Selective neuronal vulnerability in Par- 57. MilberJM,NoorigianJV,MorleyJF,PetrovitchH,WhiteL,RossGW,etal.Lewy
kinsondisease.NatRevNeurosci.2017;18:101–13. pathologyisnotthefirstsignofdegenerationinvulnerableneuronsinPar-
32. Yamada K, Iwatsubo T. Extracellular alpha-synuclein levels are regulated by kinsondisease.Neurology.2012;79:2307–14.
neuronalactivity.MolNeurodegener.2018;13:9. 58. OrrCF,RoweDB,MizunoY,MoriH,HallidayGM.Apossibleroleforhumoral
33. TenreiroS,EckermannK,OuteiroTF.Proteinphosphorylationinneurodegen- immunity in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Brain. 2005;128(Pt
eration:friendorfoe.FrontMolNeurosci.2014;7:42. 11):2665–74.
34. AbeliovichA,SchmitzY,FarinasI,Choi-LundbergD,HoWH,CastilloPE,etal. 59. Hirsch EC, Hunot S. Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease: a target for
Mice lacking alpha-synuclein display functional deficits in the nigrostriatal neuroprotection.LancetNeurol.2009;8:382–97.
dopaminesystem.Neuron.2000;25:239–52. 60. GlassCK,SaijoK,WinnerB,MarchettoMC,GageFH.Mechanismsunderlying
35. ButlerB,SahaK,RanaT,BeckerJP,SamboD,DavariP,etal.Dopami

Chunk 45:
oi-LundbergD,HoWH,CastilloPE,etal. 59. Hirsch EC, Hunot S. Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease: a target for
Mice lacking alpha-synuclein display functional deficits in the nigrostriatal neuroprotection.LancetNeurol.2009;8:382–97.
dopaminesystem.Neuron.2000;25:239–52. 60. GlassCK,SaijoK,WinnerB,MarchettoMC,GageFH.Mechanismsunderlying
35. ButlerB,SahaK,RanaT,BeckerJP,SamboD,DavariP,etal.Dopaminetrans- inflammationinneurodegeneration.Cell.2010;140:918–34.
porteractivityismodulatedbyalpha-synuclein.JBiolChem.2015;290:29542–54. 61. FerreiraSA,Romero-RamosM.Microgliaresponseduringparkinson’sdisease:
36. MasliahE,RockensteinE,VeinbergsI,MalloryM,HashimotoM,TakedaA,etal. alpha-synucleinintervention.FrontCellNeurosci.2018;12:247.
Dopaminergic loss and inclusion body formation in alpha-synuclein mice: 62. Husemann J, Loike JD, Anankov R, Febbraio M, Silverstein SC. Scavenger
implicationsforneurodegenerativedisorders.Science.2000;287:1265–9. receptors in neurobiology and neuropathology: their role on microglia and
37. RonzittiG,BucciG,EmanueleM,LeoD,SotnikovaTD,MusLV,etal.Exogenous othercellsofthenervoussystem.Glia.2002;40:195–205.
alpha-synucleindecreasesraftpartitioningofCav2.2channelsinducingdopa- 63. RochaEM,DeMirandaB,SandersLH.Alpha-synuclein:Pathology,mitochondrial
minerelease.JNeurosci.2014;34:10603–15. dysfunction and neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Dis.
38. PutzierI,KullmannPH,HornJP,LevitanES.Cav1.3channelvoltagedependence, 2018;109(PtB):249–57.
notCa2+selectivity,drivespacemakeractivityandamplifiesburstsinnigral 64. GrozdanovV,BoussetL,HoffmeisterM,BliederhaeuserC,MeierC,MadionaK,
dopamineneurons.JNeurosci.2009;29:15414–9. etal.IncreasedImmuneActivationbyPathologicalpha-SynucleininParkinson’s
39. Nedergaard S, Flatman JA, Engberg I. Nifedipine- and omega-conotoxin- Disease.AnnNeurol.2019;86:593–606.
sensitive Ca2+ conductances in guinea-pig substantia nigra pars compacta 65. ChenH,JacobsE,SchwarzschildMA,McCulloughML,CalleEE,ThunMJ,etal.
n

Chunk 46:
M,BliederhaeuserC,MeierC,MadionaK,
dopamineneurons.JNeurosci.2009;29:15414–9. etal.IncreasedImmuneActivationbyPathologicalpha-SynucleininParkinson’s
39. Nedergaard S, Flatman JA, Engberg I. Nifedipine- and omega-conotoxin- Disease.AnnNeurol.2019;86:593–606.
sensitive Ca2+ conductances in guinea-pig substantia nigra pars compacta 65. ChenH,JacobsE,SchwarzschildMA,McCulloughML,CalleEE,ThunMJ,etal.
neurones.JPhysiol.1993;466:727–47. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and the risk for Parkinson’s disease.
40. BalabanRS.TheroleofCa(2+)signalinginthecoordinationofmitochondrial AnnNeurol.2005;58:963–7.
ATPproductionwithcardiacwork.BiochimBiophysActa.2009;1787:1334–41. 66. HamzaTH,ZabetianCP,TenesaA,LaederachA,MontimurroJ,YearoutD,etal.
41. WongYC,LukK,PurtellK,BurkeNanniS,StoesslAJ,TrudeauLE,etal.Neuronal Common genetic variation in the HLA region is associated with late-onset
vulnerabilityinParkinsondisease:Shouldthefocusbeonaxonsandsynaptic sporadicParkinson’sdisease.NatGenet.2010;42:781–5.
terminals.MovDisord.2019;34:1406–22. 67. KarpenkoMN,VasilishinaAA,GromovaEA,MuruzhevaZM.MiliukhinaIV,Ber-
42. Gonzalez-HernandezT,Barroso-ChineaP,DeLaCruzMurosI,DelMarPerez- nadotte A. Interleukin-1beta, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, interleukin-6,
DelgadoM,RodriguezM.Expressionofdopamineandvesicularmonoamine interleukin-10, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha levels in CSF and serum in
transportersanddifferentialvulnerabilityofmesostriataldopaminergicneurons. relation to the clinical diversity of Parkinson’s disease. Cell Immunol.
JCompNeurol.2004;479:198–215. 2018;327:77–82.
43. ChadchankarH,IhalainenJ,TanilaH,YavichL.Decreasedreuptakeofdopamine 68. MarogianniC,SokratousM,DardiotisE,HadjigeorgiouGM,Bogdanos D, Xir-
in the dorsal striatum in the absence of alpha-synuclein. Brain Res. omerisiouG.Neurodegenerationandinflammation—aninterestinginterplayin
2011;1382:37–44. Parkinson’sdisease.IntJMolSci.2020;21.https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21228421.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

-

Chunk 47:
ankarH,IhalainenJ,TanilaH,YavichL.Decreasedreuptakeofdopamine 68. MarogianniC,SokratousM,DardiotisE,HadjigeorgiouGM,Bogdanos D, Xir-
in the dorsal striatum in the absence of alpha-synuclein. Brain Res. omerisiouG.Neurodegenerationandinflammation—aninterestinginterplayin
2011;1382:37–44. Parkinson’sdisease.IntJMolSci.2020;21.https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21228421.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
15
69. HongS,Beja-GlasserVF,NfonoyimBM,FrouinA,LiS,RamakrishnanS,etal. dopaminergic neuronal loss in a rat model of AAV alpha-synucleinopathy. J
Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse Neurosci.2009;29:3365–73.
models.Science.2016;352:712–6. 95. Volpicelli-DaleyLA,GambleKL,SchultheissCE,RiddleDM,WestAB,LeeVM.
70. BrochardV,CombadiereB,PrigentA,LaouarY,PerrinA,Beray-BerthatV,etal. Formationofalpha-synucleinLewyneurite-likeaggregatesinaxonsimpedes
Infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes into the brain contributes to neurodegen- thetransportofdistinctendosomes.MolBiolCell.2014;25:4010–23.
erationinamousemodelofParkinsondisease.JClinInvest.2009;119:182–92. 96. Garcia-ReitbockP,AnichtchikO,BellucciA,IovinoM,BalliniC,FinebergE,etal.
71. BabaY,KuroiwaA,UittiRJ,WszolekZK,YamadaT.AlterationsofT-lymphocyte SNAREproteinredistributionandsynapticfailureinatransgenicmousemodel
populationsinParkinsondisease.ParkinsonismRelatDisord.2005;11:493–8. ofParkinson’sdisease.Brain.2010;133(Pt7):2032–44.
72. SaundersJA,EstesKA,KosloskiLM,AllenHE,DempseyKM,Torres-RussottoDR, 97. Winner B, Jappelli R, Maji SK, Desplats PA, Boyer L, Aigner S, et al. In vivo
etal.CD4+regulatoryandeffector/memoryTcellsubsetsprofilemotordys- demonstrationthatalpha-synucleinoligomersaretoxic.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.
functioninParkinson’sdisease.JNeuroimmunePharm.2012;7:927–38. 2011;108:4194–9.
73. LindestamArlehamnCS,DhanwaniR,PhamJ,KuanR,FrazierA,RezendeDutra 98. CalabresiP,PicconiB,TozziA,DiFilippoM.Dopamine-mediatedregulationof
J,etal.alpha-Synuclein-specificTcellrea

Chunk 48:
 vivo
etal.CD4+regulatoryandeffector/memoryTcellsubsetsprofilemotordys- demonstrationthatalpha-synucleinoligomersaretoxic.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.
functioninParkinson’sdisease.JNeuroimmunePharm.2012;7:927–38. 2011;108:4194–9.
73. LindestamArlehamnCS,DhanwaniR,PhamJ,KuanR,FrazierA,RezendeDutra 98. CalabresiP,PicconiB,TozziA,DiFilippoM.Dopamine-mediatedregulationof
J,etal.alpha-Synuclein-specificTcellreactivityisassociatedwithpreclinicaland corticostriatalsynapticplasticity.TrendsNeurosci.2007;30:211–9.
earlyParkinson’sdisease.NatCommun.2020;11:1875. 99. Calabresi P, Picconi B, Tozzi A, Ghiglieri V, Di Filippo M. Direct and indirect
74. SulzerD,AlcalayRN,GarrettiF,CoteL,KanterE,Agin-LiebesJ,etal.Tcellsfrom pathwaysofbasalganglia:acriticalreappraisal.NatNeurosci.2014;17:1022–30.
patientswithParkinson’sdiseaserecognizealpha-synucleinpeptides.Nature. 100. Calabresi P, Centonze D, Gubellini P, Pisani A, Bernardi G. Acetylcholine-
2017;546:656–61. mediatedmodulationofstriatalfunction.TrendsNeurosci.2000;23:120–6.
75. LiX,KoudstaalW,FletcherL,CostaM,vanWinsenM,SiregarB,etal.Naturally 101. PisaniA,BernardiG,DingJ,SurmeierDJ.Re-emergenceofstriatalcholinergic
occurringantibodiesisolatedfromPDpatientsinhibitsynucleinseedinginvitro interneuronsinmovementdisorders.TrendsNeurosci.2007;30:545–53.
andrecognizeLewypathology.ActaNeuropathol.2019;137:825–36. 102. ThrelfellS,LalicT,PlattNJ,JenningsKA,DeisserothK,CraggSJ.Striataldopa-
76. AminJ,ErskineD,DonaghyPC,SurendranathanA,SwannP,KunickiAP,etal. minereleaseistriggeredbysynchronizedactivityincholinergicinterneurons.
InflammationindementiawithLewybodies.NeurobiolDis.2022;168:105698. Neuron.2012;75:58–64.
77. KingE,O’BrienJT,DonaghyP,MorrisC,BarnettN,OlsenK,etal.Peripheral 103. DingJB,GuzmanJN,PetersonJD,GoldbergJA,SurmeierDJ.Thalamicgatingof
inflammation in prodromal Alzheimer’s and Lewy body dementias. J Neurol corticostriatalsignalingbycholinergicinterneurons.Neuron.2010;67:294–307.
NeurosurgPsychiatry.2018;89:339–45. 104. GerfenCR,Surm

Chunk 49:
ybodies.NeurobiolDis.2022;168:105698. Neuron.2012;75:58–64.
77. KingE,O’BrienJT,DonaghyP,MorrisC,BarnettN,OlsenK,etal.Peripheral 103. DingJB,GuzmanJN,PetersonJD,GoldbergJA,SurmeierDJ.Thalamicgatingof
inflammation in prodromal Alzheimer’s and Lewy body dementias. J Neurol corticostriatalsignalingbycholinergicinterneurons.Neuron.2010;67:294–307.
NeurosurgPsychiatry.2018;89:339–45. 104. GerfenCR,SurmeierDJ.Modulationofstriatalprojectionsystemsbydopamine.
78. Salvesen L, Winge K, Brudek T, Agander TK, Løkkegaard A, Pakkenberg B. AnnuRevNeurosci.2011;34:441–66.
Neocorticalneuronallossinpatientswithmultiplesystematrophy:astereo- 105. TozziA,deIureA,BagettaV,TantucciM,DuranteV,Quiroga-VarelaA,etal.
logicalstudy.CerebCortex.2017;27:400–10. Alpha-synuclein produces early behavioral alterations via striatal cholinergic
79. KielyAP,MurrayCE,FotiSC,BensonBC,CourtneyR,StrandC,etal.Immunohis- synapticdysfunctionbyinteractingwithGluN2DN-methyl-D-aspartatereceptor
tochemicalandmolecularinvestigationsshowalterationintheinflammatorypro- subunit.BiolPsychiatry.2016;79:402–14.
fileofmultiplesystematrophybrain.JNeuropatholExpNeurol.2018;77:598–607. 106. DuranteV,deIureA,LoffredoV,VaikathN,DeRisiM,PaciottiS,etal.Alpha-
80. StokholmMG,IranzoA,ØstergaardK,SerradellM,OttoM,SvendsenKB,etal. synuclein targets GluN2A NMDA receptor subunit causing striatal synaptic
Assessmentofneuroinflammationinpatientswithidiopathicrapid-eye-movement dysfunctionandvisuospatialmemoryalteration.Brain.2019;142:1365–85.
sleepbehaviourdisorder:acase-controlstudy.LancetNeurol.2017;16:789–96. 107. PaolettiP,BelloneC,ZhouQ.NMDAreceptorsubunitdiversity:impactonreceptor
81. Kim R, Jun JS, Kim HJ, Jung KY, Shin YW, Yang TW, et al. Peripheral Blood properties,synapticplasticityanddisease.NatRevNeurosci.2013;14:383–400.
InflammatoryCytokinesinIdiopathicREMSleepBehaviorDisorder.MovDisord. 108. Tozzi A, Sciaccaluga M, Loffredo V, Megaro A, Ledonne A, Cardinale A, et al.
2019;34:1739–44. Dopamine-dependentearlysynapticandmot

Chunk 50:
MDAreceptorsubunitdiversity:impactonreceptor
81. Kim R, Jun JS, Kim HJ, Jung KY, Shin YW, Yang TW, et al. Peripheral Blood properties,synapticplasticityanddisease.NatRevNeurosci.2013;14:383–400.
InflammatoryCytokinesinIdiopathicREMSleepBehaviorDisorder.MovDisord. 108. Tozzi A, Sciaccaluga M, Loffredo V, Megaro A, Ledonne A, Cardinale A, et al.
2019;34:1739–44. Dopamine-dependentearlysynapticandmotordysfunctionsinducedbyα-synu-
82. FarmenK,NissenSK,StokholmMG,IranzoA,ØstergaardK,SerradellM,etal. cleininthenigrostriatalcircuit.Brain.https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab242.2021.
MonocytemarkerscorrelatewithimmuneandneuronalbrainchangesinREM 109. MikiY,TanjiK,ShinnaiK,TanakaMT,AltayF,FotiSC,etal.Pathologicalsubstrate
sleep behavior disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021;118. https://doi.org/ ofmemoryimpairmentinmultiplesystematrophy.NeuropatholApplNeuro-
10.1073/pnas.2020858118. biol.2022;48:e12844.
83. ComptaY,MartíMJ,ParedesP,TolosaE.Pureautonomicfailurewithaltered 110. IbaM,KimC,FlorioJ,ManteM,AdameA,RockensteinE,etal.Roleofalterations
dopaminetransporterimaging.ArchNeurol.2006;63:604–5. inproteinkinasep38gammainthepathogenesisofthesynapticpathologyin
84. Wang XJ, Ma MM, Zhou LB, Jiang XY, Hao MM, Teng RKF, et al. Autonomic dementia with lewy bodies and alpha-synuclein transgenic models. Front
ganglionicinjectionofα-synucleinfibrilsasamodelofpureautonomicfailure Neurosci.2020;14:286.
α-synucleinopathy.NatCommun.2020;11:934. 111. AndersenKB,HansenAK,DamholdtMF,HorsagerJ,SkjaerbaekC,GottrupH,
85. JanezicS,ThrelfellS,DodsonPD,DowieMJ,TaylorTN,PotgieterD,etal.Deficits etal.Reducedsynapticdensityinpatientswithlewybodydementia:An[(11)C]
indopaminergictransmissionprecedeneuronlossanddysfunctioninanew UCB-JPETimagingstudy.MovDisord.2021;36:2057–65.
Parkinsonmodel.ProcNatlAcadSciUsa2013;110:E4016–25. 112. BrooksPL,PeeverJH.ImpairedGABAandglycinetransmissiontriggerscardinal
86. KordowerJH,OlanowCW,DodiyaHB,ChuY,BeachTG,AdlerCH,etal.Disease featuresofrapideyemovementsleepbehavi

Chunk 51:
edsynapticdensityinpatientswithlewybodydementia:An[(11)C]
indopaminergictransmissionprecedeneuronlossanddysfunctioninanew UCB-JPETimagingstudy.MovDisord.2021;36:2057–65.
Parkinsonmodel.ProcNatlAcadSciUsa2013;110:E4016–25. 112. BrooksPL,PeeverJH.ImpairedGABAandglycinetransmissiontriggerscardinal
86. KordowerJH,OlanowCW,DodiyaHB,ChuY,BeachTG,AdlerCH,etal.Disease featuresofrapideyemovementsleepbehaviordisorderinmice.JNeurosci.
duration and the integrity of the nigrostriatal system in Parkinson’s disease. 2011;31:7111–21.
Brain.2013;136(Pt8):2419–31. 113. ValenciaGarciaS,BrischouxF,ClementO,LibourelPA,ArthaudS,LazarusM,
87. Nandhagopal R, Kuramoto L, Schulzer M, Mak E, Cragg J, McKenzie J, et al. etal.VentromedialmedullainhibitoryneuroninactivationinducesREMsleep
Longitudinalevolutionofcompensatorychangesinstriataldopamineproces- withoutatoniaandREMsleepbehaviordisorder.NatCommun.2018;9:504.
singinParkinson’sdisease.Brain.2011;134(Pt11):3290–8. 114. Schrag A, Sauerbier A, Chaudhuri KR. New clinical trials for nonmotor mani-
88. PhanJA,StokholmK,Zareba-PaslawskaJ,JakobsenS,VangK,GjeddeA,etal. festationsofParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2015;30:1490–504.https://doi.org/
Earlysynapticdysfunctioninducedbyalpha-synucleininaratmodelofPar- 10.1002/mds.26415.
kinson’sdisease.SciRep.2017;7:6363. 115. ParnettiL,GaetaniL,EusebiP,PaciottiS,HanssonO,El-AgnafO,etal.CSFand
89. LundbladM,DecressacM,MattssonB,BjorklundA.Impairedneurotransmission bloodbiomarkersforParkinson’sdisease.LancetNeurol.2019;18:573–86.
causedbyoverexpressionofalpha-synucleininnigraldopamineneurons.Proc 116. KangUJ,BoehmeAK,FairfoulG,ShahnawazM,MaTC,HuttenSJ,etal.Com-
NatlAcadSciUSA.2012;109:3213–9. parativestudyofcerebrospinalfluidα-synucleinseedingaggregationassaysfor
90. Decressac M, Mattsson B, Lundblad M, Weikop P, Bjorklund A. Progressive diagnosisofParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2019;34:536–44.
neurodegenerativeandbehaviouralchangesinducedbyAAV-mediatedover- 117. Shahnawaz M, Mukherjee A, Pritzkow S, Mendez N, 

Chunk 52:
,FairfoulG,ShahnawazM,MaTC,HuttenSJ,etal.Com-
NatlAcadSciUSA.2012;109:3213–9. parativestudyofcerebrospinalfluidα-synucleinseedingaggregationassaysfor
90. Decressac M, Mattsson B, Lundblad M, Weikop P, Bjorklund A. Progressive diagnosisofParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2019;34:536–44.
neurodegenerativeandbehaviouralchangesinducedbyAAV-mediatedover- 117. Shahnawaz M, Mukherjee A, Pritzkow S, Mendez N, Rabadia P, Liu X, et al.
expression of alpha-synuclein in midbrain dopamine neurons. Neurobiol Dis. Discriminatingα-synucleinstrainsinParkinson’sdiseaseandmultiplesystem
2012;45:939–53. atrophy.Nature.2020;578:273–7.
91. ThomsenMB,FerreiraSA,SchachtAC,JacobsenJ,SimonsenM,BetzerC,etal.PET 118. Stuendl A, Kraus T, Chatterjee M, Zapke B, Sadowski B, Moebius W, et al.
imaging reveals early and progressive dopaminergic deficits after intra-striatal Synuclein in Plasma-DerivedExtracellular Vesicles IsaPotentialBiomarkerof
injectionofpreformedalpha-synucleinfibrilsinrats.NeurobiolDis.2021;149:105229. Parkinson’sDisease.MovDisord.2021;36:2508–18.
92. Volpicelli-Daley LA. Effects of alpha-synuclein on axonal transport. Neurobiol 119. KlugeA,BunkJ,SchaefferE,DrobnyA,XiangW,KnackeH,etal.Detectionof
Dis.2017;105:321–7. neuron-derivedpathologicalα-synucleininblood.Brain.2022;145:3058–71.
93. ChuY,MorfiniGA,LanghamerLB,HeY,BradyST,KordowerJH.Alterationsin 120. PostumaRB,BergD,SternM,PoeweW,OlanowCW,OertelW,etal.MDSclinical
axonaltransportmotorproteinsinsporadicandexperimentalParkinson’sdis- diagnosticcriteriaforParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2015;30:1591–601.
ease.Brain.2012;135(Pt7):2058–73. 121. GangulyU,SinghS,PalS,PrasadS,AgrawalBK,SainiRV,etal.Alpha-Synuclein
94. ChungCY,KoprichJB,SiddiqiH,IsacsonO.Dynamicchangesinpresynapticand asaBiomarkerofParkinson’sDisease:Good,butNotGoodEnough.FrontAging
axonal transport proteins combined with striatal neuroinflammation precede Neurosci.2021;13:702639.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
16
122. ParnettiL,Farott

Chunk 53:
 GangulyU,SinghS,PalS,PrasadS,AgrawalBK,SainiRV,etal.Alpha-Synuclein
94. ChungCY,KoprichJB,SiddiqiH,IsacsonO.Dynamicchangesinpresynapticand asaBiomarkerofParkinson’sDisease:Good,butNotGoodEnough.FrontAging
axonal transport proteins combined with striatal neuroinflammation precede Neurosci.2021;13:702639.
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---

P.Calabresietal.
16
122. ParnettiL,FarottiL,EusebiP,ChiasseriniD,DeCarloC,GiannandreaD,etal. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
DifferentialroleofCSFalpha-synuclein species,tau,andAβ42inParkinson’s ThisworkwassupportedbygrantsfromtheFrescoParkinsonInstitutetoNewYork
Disease.FrontAgingNeurosci.2014;6:53. University School of Medicine and The Marlene and Paolo Fresco Institute for
123. VolcD,PoeweW,KutzelniggA,LührsP,Thun-HohensteinC,SchneebergerA, Parkinson’sandMovementDisorders,whichweremadepossiblewithsupportfrom
etal.Safetyandimmunogenicityoftheα-synucleinactiveimmunotherapeutic MarleneandPaoloFresco(toVG,PC),bytheItalianMinistryofEducation,University
PD01AinpatientswithParkinson’sdisease:arandomised,single-blinded,phase and Research (MIUR)-2017ENN4F, and by the Italian Ministry of Health, Ricerca
1trial.LancetNeurol.2020;19:591–600. CorrenteRC2022.
124. PoeweW,VolcD,SeppiK,MedoriR,LührsP,KutzelniggA,etal.Safetyand
tolerability of active immunotherapy targeting α-synuclein with PD03A in
patientswithearlyparkinson’sdisease:arandomized,placebo-controlled,phase COMPETINGINTERESTS
1study.JParkinsonsDis.2021;11:1079–89.
PC received/receives research support, speaker honoraria, and support to attend
125. MeissnerWG,TraonAP,Foubert-SamierA,GalabovaG,GalitzkyM,KutzelniggA, national and international conferences (not related to the present study) from:
etal.Aphase1randomizedtrialofspecificactiveα-synucleinimmunotherapies
Abbvie, Bial, Bayer Schering, Biogen-Dompè, Biogen-Idec, Eisai, Lilly, Lundbeck,
PD01AandPD03Ainmultiplesystematrophy.MovDisord.2020;35:1957–65.
Lusofarmaco,Merck-Serono,Novartis,Sanofi-Genzyme,Teva,UCBPharma,Zambon.
126.

Chunk 54:
bovaG,GalitzkyM,KutzelniggA, national and international conferences (not related to the present study) from:
etal.Aphase1randomizedtrialofspecificactiveα-synucleinimmunotherapies
Abbvie, Bial, Bayer Schering, Biogen-Dompè, Biogen-Idec, Eisai, Lilly, Lundbeck,
PD01AandPD03Ainmultiplesystematrophy.MovDisord.2020;35:1957–65.
Lusofarmaco,Merck-Serono,Novartis,Sanofi-Genzyme,Teva,UCBPharma,Zambon.
126. BaeEJ,LeeHJ,RockensteinE,HoDH,ParkEB,YangNY,etal.Antibody-aided
The other authors reported no funding from any institution, including personal
clearanceofextracellularα-synucleinpreventscell-to-cellaggregatetransmis-
relationships,interests,grants,employment,affiliations,patents,inventions,honor-
sion.JNeurosci.2012;32:13454–69.
aria,consultancies,royalties,stockoptions/ownership,orexperttestimonyforthelast
127. MasliahE,RockensteinE,ManteM,CrewsL,SpencerB,AdameA,etal.Passive 12monthsbiomedicalfinancialinterestsorpotentialconflictsofinterest.
immunizationreducesbehavioralandneuropathologicaldeficitsinanalpha-
synucleintransgenicmodelofLewybodydisease.PLoSOne.2011;6:e19338.
128. JankovicJ.Pathogenesis-targetedtherapeuticstrategiesinParkinson’sdisease. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
MovDisord.2019;34:41–4.
129. PaganoG,TaylorKI,Anzures-CabreraJ,MarchesiM,SimuniT,MarekK,etal.Trial CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoPaoloCalabresi.
of prasinezumab in early-stage Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl J Med.
2022;387:421–32.https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2202867. Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
130. KalluriH,ZadikoffL,RueterL,GraffO,XiongH.Randomized,placebo-controlled
single ascending dose study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacoki-
netics,andimmunogenicityofABBV-0805,ananti-alpha-synucleinmonoclonal
Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
antibodyinhealthysubjects[abstract].MovDisorder.2021;36:S179.
inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
131. BrysM,FanningL,HungS,Ellenb

Chunk 55:
,XiongH.Randomized,placebo-controlled
single ascending dose study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacoki-
netics,andimmunogenicityofABBV-0805,ananti-alpha-synucleinmonoclonal
Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
antibodyinhealthysubjects[abstract].MovDisorder.2021;36:S179.
inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
131. BrysM,FanningL,HungS,EllenbogenA,PennerN,YangM,etal.Randomized
phase I clinical trial of anti-α-synuclein antibody BIIB054. Mov Disord.
2019;34:1154–63.
132. LangAE,SiderowfAD,MacklinEA,PoeweW,BrooksDJ,FernandezHH,etal.Trial Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
ofcinpanemabinearlyParkinson’sdisease.N.EnglJMed.2022;387:408–20. Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
133. Almandoz-GilL,LindströmV,SigvardsonJ,KahlePJ,LannfeltL,IngelssonM, adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
etal.Mappingofsurface-exposedepitopesofinvitroandinvivoaggregated appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
speciesofalpha-synuclein.CellMolNeurobiol.2017;37:1217–26. Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
134. WagnerJ,RyazanovS,LeonovA,LevinJ,ShiS,SchmidtF,etal.Anle138b:anovel materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
oligomermodulatorfordisease-modifyingtherapyofneurodegenerativediseases indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
suchasprionandParkinson’sdisease.ActaNeuropathol.2013;125:795–813. article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
135. PriceDL,KoikeMA,KhanA,WrasidloW,RockensteinE,MasliahE,etal.Thesmall regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
molecule alpha-synuclein misfolding inhibitor, NPT200-11, produces multiple from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
benefitsinananimalmodelofParkinson’sdisease.SciRep.2018

Chunk 56:
icenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
135. PriceDL,KoikeMA,KhanA,WrasidloW,RockensteinE,MasliahE,etal.Thesmall regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
molecule alpha-synuclein misfolding inhibitor, NPT200-11, produces multiple from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
benefitsinananimalmodelofParkinson’sdisease.SciRep.2018;8:16165. creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
136. SmitJW,BasileP,PratoMK,DetalleL,MathyFX,SchmidtA.etal.Phase1/1b
studies of UCB0599, an oral inhibitor of α-synuclein misfolding, including a
randomizedstudyinParkinson’sdisease.MovDisord.2022;37:2045–2056. ©TheAuthor(s)2023
CellDeathandDisease (2023) 14:176

---PAGE BREAK---



