Chunk 1:
BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/bba
Review
Modeling tauopathy: a range of complementary approaches
Garth F. Hall*, Jun Yao
DepartmentofBiologicalSciences,UniversityofMassachusetts,Lowell,Massachusetts,01854USA
Received18May2004;accepted5October2004
Availableonline19October2004
Abstract
The large group of neurodegenerative diseases which feature abnormal metabolism and accumulation of tau protein (tauopathies)
characteristicallyproduceamultiplicityofcellularandsystemicabnormalitiesinhumanpatients.Understandingthecomplexpathogenetic
mechanismsbywhichabnormalitiesintauleadtosystemicneurofibrillarydegenerativediseaserequirestheconstructionanduseofmodel
experimentalsystemsinwhichthebehaviorofhumantaucanbeanalyzedundercontrolledconditions.Inthispaper,wesurveythewaysin
which in vitro, cellular and whole-animal models of human tauopathy are being used to add to our knowledge of the pathogenetic
mechanismsunderlyingtheseconditions.Inparticular,wefocusonthecomplementaryadvantagesandlimitationsofvariousapproachesto
constructing tauopathy models presently inuse with respect to those of murinetransgenic tauopathy models.
D 2004Published byElsevier B.V.
Keywords:Tauopathy;Animalmodel;Neurofibrillary;Neurodegeneration;Cellculture;Transgenic
Eversincetheidentificationoftauproteinastheprimary modelshavebeennotedinsomerecentreviews[8,10],such
component of the neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) of Alz- modelsandtheirpotentialuseshaveattractedrelativelylittle
heimer’s disease (AD), the biology and pathobiology of attention. This review will focus on the contributions of
human tau protein has been a major focus of research non-murine model systems to our understanding of tau-
interest in the field of neurodegenerative disease. The induced and tau deposit-related NFDs in humans, centering
importance of tau was emphasized by the discovery several on the cellular and systemic consequences of the intra-
years ago that mutations in the tau coding sequen

Chunk 2:
ontributions of
human tau protein has been a major focus of research non-murine model systems to our understanding of tau-
interest in the field of neurodegenerative disease. The induced and tau deposit-related NFDs in humans, centering
importance of tau was emphasized by the discovery several on the cellular and systemic consequences of the intra-
years ago that mutations in the tau coding sequence are cellularaccumulationandmodificationofhumantauprotein
tightlylinkedtoseveralfamilialneurofibrillarydegenerative in neurons. Special emphasis will be placed on the
diseases (collectively called frontotemporal dementias complementary nature of information derived from cellular
linked to chromosome 17, or FTD-17). This finding and non-murine tg models of tauopathy with respect to that
establishedtauproteinasacentralfactorinthepathogenesis provided by tg mouse models.
of a large group of neurofibrillary degenerative diseases An understanding of the role played by abnormalities of
(NFDs) including AD [1–6]. Much of the recent activity in tau metabolism in human tauopathies (and which must be
the field of tau pathobiology has been directed at the replicated in any successful cellular or whole animal
creationoftransgenic(tg)mousemodelsinwhichwild-type tauopathymodel)mustultimatelybebasedonaknowledge
or mutant human tau isoforms have been overexpressed of the normal cellular functions of tau, many of which are
under the control of a variety of promoters to produce well understood and are briefly summarized below. This
neurofibrillary pathology. Recent murine tg models of discussion will be accompanied by a consideration of (a)
tauopathy have been reviewed extensively elsewhere [7– babnormalQcharacteristicsacquiredbytauduringthecourse
9], and while the contributions of non-murine tauopathy of some or all tauopathies and (b) pathological events
associated with intracellular tau accumulation which may
play critical roles in the cytopathogenesis of tauopathy, and
whichthereforear

Chunk 3:
ill be accompanied by a consideration of (a)
tauopathy have been reviewed extensively elsewhere [7– babnormalQcharacteristicsacquiredbytauduringthecourse
9], and while the contributions of non-murine tauopathy of some or all tauopathies and (b) pathological events
associated with intracellular tau accumulation which may
play critical roles in the cytopathogenesis of tauopathy, and
whichthereforeareattractivetargetsformodelinginbothin
* Correspondingauthor.Tel.:+19789342893;fax:+19789343044.
E-mailaddress: Garth_Hall@uml.edu(G.F.Hall). vitro and in vivo systems. A summary of the hypothetical
0925-4439/$-seefrontmatterD2004PublishedbyElsevierB.V.
doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.10.002

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 225
basis informing most recent approaches to generating most 1.Normalandpathologicalcharacteristicsofhumantau
tauopathy models (the bTangle HypothesisQ) will then be protein
presented(seeFig.1).Therestofthepaperwillbedevoted
to a comparative discussion of the salient features and Tau is best known as a microtubule-associated protein
technical advantages and disadvantages of a variety of cell- (MAP)whichco-purifieswithtubulinwhenthelatterisput
free, cellular and whole animal models which attempt to through a series of assembly/disassembly cycles [11–13]. It
recreate the pathological behavior of tau seen in human appears as a set of six isoforms which are differentially
tauopathies. A summary of the characteristics of these spliced from transcripts of a single gene located on
systems as tauopathy models is provided in Table 1. chromosome17[14–16].Eachtauisoformcontainsaseries
of3/4tandemrepeatunits(dependingontheisoform)which
bind to MTs and serve to stabilize them [17,18]. The MT
binding repeat region of tau is flanked by serine/threonine-
rich regions which can be phosphorylated by a variety of
kinases and which are associated with tau hyperphosphor-
ylation in AD and other tauopathies [19–24]. The phos-
phorylation

Chunk 4:
. chromosome17[14–16].Eachtauisoformcontainsaseries
of3/4tandemrepeatunits(dependingontheisoform)which
bind to MTs and serve to stabilize them [17,18]. The MT
binding repeat region of tau is flanked by serine/threonine-
rich regions which can be phosphorylated by a variety of
kinases and which are associated with tau hyperphosphor-
ylation in AD and other tauopathies [19–24]. The phos-
phorylation of these sites plays a critical role in the
regulation of tau/MT interactions. Under normal circum-
stances,the MT binding repeatsplus theirflankingregions,
whichmakeupthecentralandC-terminalportionsofalltau
isoforms, are thought to be in close proximity with an MT,
while the N-terminal domain of tau is thought to project
away from the MT, and may interact with other cellular
elements, including the plasma membrane [25].
Tauisexpressedlargely(butnotexclusively)inneurons,
where it is preferentially localized to the axonal compart-
ment[26,27].Itappearstoplayaparticularlyimportantrole
in the stabilization of axonal MTs, and may play a key role
in the initial development of axonal identity and axoden-
dritic polarity is at least some neuronal types [28,29]. In
human tauopathies, tau loses its normal axonal distribution
and its normal association with MTs, and aggregates in
intracellular filamentous deposits whose morphology, iso-
form content and intracellular location may vary depending
on the tauopathy in question [30–35]. This is accompanied
by a progressive destabilization and loss of cellular MTs,
loss of impinging synapses, and eventually by progressive
disintegrationofbothdendritesandtheaxonoftheaffected
neuron, culminating in cell death [31,36,37]. Different
neuronaltypesandregionsofthebrainarecharacteristically
affected in different tauopathies, with pathology localized
Fig. 1. A schematic diagram of the bTangle HypothesisQ of tau-induced mainly to neurons, glial cells, or both, depending on the
neurofibrillary degeneration summarizes the relationships between abnor-

Chunk 5:
ritesandtheaxonoftheaffected
neuron, culminating in cell death [31,36,37]. Different
neuronaltypesandregionsofthebrainarecharacteristically
affected in different tauopathies, with pathology localized
Fig. 1. A schematic diagram of the bTangle HypothesisQ of tau-induced mainly to neurons, glial cells, or both, depending on the
neurofibrillary degeneration summarizes the relationships between abnor- condition [33–35].
malintracellularhtauaccumulation(duetoapathologicalfailureofnormal Phosphorylation of the MT binding repeat flanking
htauturnoverinhumantauopathies,andtohtauoverexpressioninABCand
domains regions of tau is abnormally prominent in the tau
murine transgenic tauopathy models) and the resulting accumulation,
(PHF-tau) purified from most of the pathological tau
aggregation, phosphorylation and acquisition of toxicity by tau which
ultimatelyleadstoneuronaldegenerationanddeath.Thecorefeaturesof deposits (NFTs, Pick bodies, neuropil threads, etc.) that
thehypothesis(showninshadedboxesandconnectedwithheavyarrows) arecharacteristicallyseeninthebrainsoftauopathypatients
providetheoverallconceptualframeworkthatservesasapointofdeparture [38,39]. Consequently, the factors that influence the
formosttauopathy-relatedmodelingapproachespresentlyinuse.Notethat
phosphorylation state of these sites have been a focus of
intracellular tau accumulation results either from abnormalities in extra-
research over the past 10 years. During this time, a large
cellularsignallingpathways(asislikelyinAD)orviatheabnormalMT
binding properties and/or fibrillogenic changes caused by tauopathy number of mAbs which specifically recognize many of
mutationseitherinthecodingsequenceofhumantauorinintronsofthe these sites in their phosphorylated state have been gen-
taugenewhichaffecttheproportionsoftauisoformsexpressedinparticular erated, and the kinases and phosphatases which regulate
cells. Since (accordingto the TangleHypothesis) the key cytopathogenic
theirphosphorylationstateshavebeenidentif

Chunk 6:
r of mAbs which specifically recognize many of
mutationseitherinthecodingsequenceofhumantauorinintronsofthe these sites in their phosphorylated state have been gen-
taugenewhichaffecttheproportionsoftauisoformsexpressedinparticular erated, and the kinases and phosphatases which regulate
cells. Since (accordingto the TangleHypothesis) the key cytopathogenic
theirphosphorylationstateshavebeenidentified[22–24,40–
eventsinmostoralltauopathiesareentirelytheresultoftheabnormaltau
42]. Some evidence suggesting that the phosphorylation
accumulation, tauopathies can be modeled simply by overexpressing
humantauinthetargetcellororganism. statesofcertainofthesesites,includingthreonine231[41],

---PAGE BREAK---

226 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
serines242[43] and396/404[44],maybythemselvesplay istic cellular lesions of human tauopathy. This assumption
key roles in determining whether and how strongly tau can (called the bTangle HypothesisQ here for convenience, see
bindMTs.Ithasalsobecomeclearthatmostsitesofserine/ Fig. 1) is supported by the following observations:
threonine phosphorylation in the repeat flanking regions of
tau protein are phosphorylated under some normal circum- (1) Familial tauopathies caused by coding sequence or
stances, including fetal development [45,46] and mitosis splicing mutations in the tau gene are invariably
[47,48], and that the phosphorylation state tau is normally inherited in a dominant fashion, suggesting that
highly dynamic [49]. By contrast, there are indications that tauopathy mutations cause a gain of some new toxic
PHF-tau may become constitutively phosphorylated in AD functionbythemutanttauproducedratherthanalossof
[50] and very likely in other tauopathies as well [51]. a normal function, and that any bgainedQ tauopathic
Moreover, while bnormalQ tau has no well-defined secon- featuresoftaubiologymightthemselvesbecytotoxicor
dary or tertiary structure, it has been shown that serine/ playapivotalroleinthecytop

Chunk 7:
HF-tau may become constitutively phosphorylated in AD functionbythemutanttauproducedratherthanalossof
[50] and very likely in other tauopathies as well [51]. a normal function, and that any bgainedQ tauopathic
Moreover, while bnormalQ tau has no well-defined secon- featuresoftaubiologymightthemselvesbecytotoxicor
dary or tertiary structure, it has been shown that serine/ playapivotalroleinthecytopathogenesisoftauopathy.
threonine phosphorylation of tau at several of the sites (2) Tau bknockoutQ mice have shown only relatively
mentioned above or at high stoichiometric ratios can cause minor abnormalities in a limited range of neuronal
tau to become bstifferQ [52], less able to bind MTs types [72], suggesting that the loss of normal tau
[41,43,44,53] and more resistant to proteolysis [19,54,55]. function in neurons in situ is either not of great
TheN-terminalbprojectionQdomainoftaucontainstyrosine consequence and/or can be compensated for by other
phosphorylation sites which are phosphorylated by signal MAPs during development.
transductionrelatedkinases,andhasbeenshowntointeract (3) Cellular and whole animal tauopathy models which
with the plasma membrane and perimembranous structures reproduce the pattern of neurofibrillary degeneration
[25]. As with the kinases and phosphatases which regulate typical of tauopathies invariably also generate tau
serine/threoninephosphorylationsitesoftheflankingregion aggregates [73–77], whereas models in which no
discussed above, at least one of the tyrosine kinases which aggregates are observed very rarely show overt signs
phosphorylate the tau projection domain is abnormally ofdegeneration[78–80],suggestingthelikelihoodofa
distributed in AD [56–58]. causal link between these events.
The question of whether the phosphorylation of
babnormalb sites on tau or the phosphorylation of tau at Any general hypothesis of the mechanisms by which
an abnormally high stoichiometric ratio actually facilitates abnormal tau biology leads to neurofib

Chunk 8:
 tau projection domain is abnormally ofdegeneration[78–80],suggestingthelikelihoodofa
distributed in AD [56–58]. causal link between these events.
The question of whether the phosphorylation of
babnormalb sites on tau or the phosphorylation of tau at Any general hypothesis of the mechanisms by which
an abnormally high stoichiometric ratio actually facilitates abnormal tau biology leads to neurofibrillary degenerative
tau filament formation in any significant way during the diseasemustaccountforakeyfeatureoftheeffectsofboth
pathogenesis of any or all tauopathic syndromes is as yet tau hyperphosphorylation and btauopathyQ mutations in the
unresolved, although there are some recent indications that tau coding sequence; i.e., that both of these interfere with
this may be so [59,60]. Much the same can be said of a normaltau/MTinteractions,thusproducingapotentialbloss
variety of other abnormal modifications that have been ofnormalfunctionQaswellas(orinsteadof)abgainoftoxic
observed inboth wild-type andmutanttauproteinisoforms functionQ character. The Tangle Hypothesis (i.e., that the
that make up PHF-tau, which may contribute to filamento- deleterious consequences of abnormal tau aggregate for-
genesis and toxicity of tau aggregates, including truncation mation are the central factors in tauopathy cytopatho-
[61–65], abnormal folding [66] ubiquitination [67], glyca- genesis) is still consistent with these findings, since it is
tion [68], nitration [69] and covalent cross-linking [70,71]. likelythatthebnormalQroleplayedbytauinbindingtoand
Since hyperphosphorylation of the MT flanking regions of stabilizingMTsmaybecritical insequesteringtaufromthe
tau and/or other abnormal characteristics of the filamentous cytoplasm, and thus keeping cytoplasmic concentrations of
tau found in NFTs and other pathological tau aggregates is tau low enough to prevent spontaneous filament and
likely to play some role in the pathogenesis of tau-related aggregate formation in normal neurons. It s

Chunk 9:
ing regions of stabilizingMTsmaybecritical insequesteringtaufromthe
tau and/or other abnormal characteristics of the filamentous cytoplasm, and thus keeping cytoplasmic concentrations of
tau found in NFTs and other pathological tau aggregates is tau low enough to prevent spontaneous filament and
likely to play some role in the pathogenesis of tau-related aggregate formation in normal neurons. It should be noted
NFDs in humans, they are attractive targets for modeling thatnotallfindingsinthefieldoftauopathyresearchappear
(see below). to be consistent with the Tangle Hypothesis as framed
above; for instance, a familial tauopathy resulting from a
mutation in tau has been described which features signifi-
2. Approaches to developing tauopathy models—the cant neuronal loss in the apparent absence of tau aggregate
Tangle Hypothesis formation[81].Itisalsopossiblethatthereducedamountof
taufunction(causedeitherbythelossofonealleleinFTD-
The great majority of cellular and whole animal 17 or by the sequestration of otherwise functional tau in
tauopathy models developed to date have been based on aggregates) may contribute to tauopathic phenotypes. That
the assumption that the intracellular formation of tau said,theTangleHypothesisisgenerallyconsistentwithand/
aggregates is the key cytopathogenetic event in human orsupported by thevast majority ofour present knowledge
tauopathies, and that some toxic characteristic of the of human tauopathies, and serves as a broad conceptual
aggregates themselves perturbs the physiology of the framework for the generation of most of the tauopathy
affected neuron in such a way as to produce the character- models to be considered below.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 227
Table1
Summaryofthecomparativeadvantagesandlimitationsofcellularandtgmodelsofhumantauopathiesdiscussedinthetext
Modeltype Generaladvantages Generallimitations Specificexamples Specificadvantages References
Cellularmodels/ Nonneurona

Chunk 10:
cted neuron in such a way as to produce the character- models to be considered below.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 227
Table1
Summaryofthecomparativeadvantagesandlimitationsofcellularandtgmodelsofhumantauopathiesdiscussedinthetext
Modeltype Generaladvantages Generallimitations Specificexamples Specificadvantages References
Cellularmodels/ Nonneuronalcell Simplicity(singlecell Incompleteness SF9cells Extremesimplicity [99,100]
Cellculture lines(transient type,controllable (nointermediate
andstable environment) filaments,very
transfection) simpleprocesses)
Accessibilitytowide Dissimilarityto CHO,COS Ubiquity(wellstudied, [47,103]
varietyofmanipulations humanneurons 3T3cells widelyavailable)
andtechniques insitu
Lackof CHOcells Aggregatesproduced [76]
endogenoustau fromsometauopathy
mutants
Neuronal Neuronal Abnormal PC12,SY5Y Ubiquity.Aggregates [105,116]
celllines morphology extracellular producedfrom
(transient environmentand tauopathy
transfection) mutants(SY5Y)
Easeofuse, Incompleteneuronal N-Tera2 Humanorigin, [112,114]
accessibility differentiation longevity
(vs.insitu)
Differentiable Relativelyfull
differentiation
Inducible,stably Easeofuse Relativelylaborious H4BE(2)-M17D Humanorigin, [108,118]
transfectedlines oncecreated toproduce inducible
(vs.othercultured Filamentoustau
cellmodels) aggregates
Primaryculture Fullydifferentiated Difficulttotransfect TauKOmice [119]
neurons
InSitu Insitucellular Insituadvantages Relativelylaborious LampreyABC Identifiedcells [73,74,
(fulldifferentiation, (unlikerodentmodels) 125,126,
possibilityoflong 138]
termexperiments)
Nontransgenic Fewcells Largeneuronsize
background(normal (nobiochemistry) permitselaborate
extracellular singlecellexperiments
environment). (intracellular
Drugscreeningpossible microinjection)
Greateraccessibility
insituthantgmodels
Insitu Insituand Sameaslamprey,also: Insitu Sameaslamprey,also: [128]
multicellular non-transgenic Relativelyexpensive transfe

Chunk 11:
possibilityoflong 138]
termexperiments)
Nontransgenic Fewcells Largeneuronsize
background(normal (nobiochemistry) permitselaborate
extracellular singlecellexperiments
environment). (intracellular
Drugscreeningpossible microinjection)
Greateraccessibility
insituthantgmodels
Insitu Insituand Sameaslamprey,also: Insitu Sameaslamprey,also: [128]
multicellular non-transgenic Relativelyexpensive transfected Phylogenetic
ratneurons similaritytohumans
Canmodel Noidentifiedcells Largeanimalsize,
intercellular futurecreationof
interactions tgstrainsispossible
onsingle
celllevel
Wholeanimal Invertebrate Inexpensive,can Phylogenetic C.elegans Simple,highly [129]
models beproduced dissimilarity stereotypedandwell
(transgenic) inquantity tohumans studieddevelopment
Favorsbiochemical Inaccessibility Welldevelopedgenetics
andgeneticanalysis ofneurons withshortgenerations
insitu(smallsize)
Behavioral Drosophila SameasC.elegans [130,131]
analysispossible
Lower Lessexpensive Lessphylogenetic Zebrafish Wellstudied [134]
vertebrate thanmice similaritytohumans development
thanmice
Vertebrateneuronal Wellstudiedgenetics
morphology
Greatersimplicity Opticalclarity
andstereotypy
atcellularand
intercellularlevels
thanmice
(continuedonnextpage)

---PAGE BREAK---

228 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
Table1(continued)
Modeltype Generaladvantages Generallimitations Specificexamples Specificadvantages References
Wholeanimal Behavioral
models analysis
(transgenic) possible
Murine Phylogeneticsimilarity Veryexpensiveto Murinetg, Reviewedin
tohumans createandmaintain knockout/ [7–10]
inmodels
Mostcompleteandversatile Complexity,lackof
wholeanimalmodels identifiedneurons
ofhumantauopathies
available
Establishedtgtechnology Limitedphysical
accessibilityinsitu
Ubiquity
Behavioralanalysis bCompositeQmodels Flexibility-canbe
possibleandrelevantto usingmurinetgs combinedwith
humandisease primarycellculture
andregionalinsitu [121,137]
Finalscreeninanimal manipulations
testingofan

Chunk 12:
10]
inmodels
Mostcompleteandversatile Complexity,lackof
wholeanimalmodels identifiedneurons
ofhumantauopathies
available
Establishedtgtechnology Limitedphysical
accessibilityinsitu
Ubiquity
Behavioralanalysis bCompositeQmodels Flexibility-canbe
possibleandrelevantto usingmurinetgs combinedwith
humandisease primarycellculture
andregionalinsitu [121,137]
Finalscreeninanimal manipulations
testingofantitauopathy
therapeutics
The general nature and flexibility of the Tangle Hypo- 3. Formation of tau aggregates
thesis is one of the reasons for its utility as a tacit point of
departure for modeling tauopathy. The predictions of this The characteristic aggregates of PHF-tau seen in human
hypothesis are very broad, and do not explicitly distinguish tauopathies can be generated from native tau protein in any
between the pathogenetic consequences of tau aggregate ofthreeways:(1)fromallsixisoforms(orasubsetofthese)
formation itself and those of modifications of tau (hyper- of essentially normal tau which may have been modified in
phosphorylation, truncation, glycation, etc.) which are a variety of ways (as in AD and in sporadic forms of non-
always found in the context of tau aggregates in human AD tauopathies), (2) from essentially normal tau isoforms
tauopathy patients. The Tangle Hypothesis thus provides which have been abnormally spliced to generate abnormal
an adequate paradigm not only for the generation of isoform ratios, and (3) from abnormal tau isoforms
tauopathy models which feature the development of containing point mutations within the tau coding sequence.
filamentous tau aggregates (until recently, a very small Either of the latter two situations is sufficientto induce any
minority of all tauopathy models), but also for any model of several familial tauopathies [1–5], a finding which
in which bPHF-tauQ-specific tau modifications can be established the central importance of tau pathobiology to
generated. Models which do not themselves feature the the etiology of b

Chunk 13:
 aggregates (until recently, a very small Either of the latter two situations is sufficientto induce any
minority of all tauopathy models), but also for any model of several familial tauopathies [1–5], a finding which
in which bPHF-tauQ-specific tau modifications can be established the central importance of tau pathobiology to
generated. Models which do not themselves feature the the etiology of both AD and other tauopathies. This review
reproduction of tau aggregates can therefore be of great will exclude consideration of tauopathy models directed at
utility in studying and differentiating between the cellular the second of these mechanisms (i.e., FTD-17 mutations
effects of individual PHF-tau-specific tau modifications in which induce aberrant splicing of the tau gene, resulting in
the absence of other such modifications and of tau filament abnormal isoform ratios), since studies based on the use of
formation itself. Most major models of tauopathy presently models of this type have not as yet been published.
in use are thus either tacitly or explicitly based on the
Tangle Hypothesis. This includes the large number of
models that are based on altering aspects of cellular 4. General types of tauopathy models
functions other than tau (kinase/phosphatase expression
and activity, etc.) resulting in PHF-like modifications of In this review, three types of tauopathy model are
endogenously expressed tau. For the sake of simplicity, the considered. These are (in order of increasing complexity
following discussion will be limited to those models that and scope) (1) cell-free, (2) cellular and (3) whole animal
are based on the overexpression of either wild-type or transgenic (tg) models. Each of these model types offers
mutant human tau. inherent advantages and disadvantages for advancing our
Each of the models discussed below is being used to understanding of abnormal tau biology, and ultimately for
address one of the following questions: (1) Why are tau elucidating the mec

Chunk 14:
ellular and (3) whole animal
are based on the overexpression of either wild-type or transgenic (tg) models. Each of these model types offers
mutant human tau. inherent advantages and disadvantages for advancing our
Each of the models discussed below is being used to understanding of abnormal tau biology, and ultimately for
address one of the following questions: (1) Why are tau elucidating the mechanisms of tau induced neurofibrillary
aggregates toxic? (2) What is the mechanism of this disease. The advantages of simpler models are generally
toxicity? (3) Which of the many modifications of tau those of greater accessibility to manipulation and flexibility
specific to pathological aggregates is potentially a cause as relative to the complementary advantages of completeness
well as a consequence of tau aggregation? and more direct relevance to human disease that are the

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 229
hallmarks of the more complex whole animal models, biology which can readily be studied in vitro. Thus, the
particularly the many murine transgenic models. These details of tau/MT interactions are particularly well under-
complementary advantages have permitted investigators in stood because this interaction can be readily modeled in
the field to identify features of tau function in vivo that are simpleinvitrosystems.Similarly,thedetailsoftaufilament
potentially relevant to the etiology of human tauopathy in assembly, including those of the formation of intermediate
cellularmodels(usuallyinculturedneuronalcelllines),and oligomer species [96], and the inhibition of filament
then testing their relevance to the pathogenesis of human formation by exogenous agents [97] have been elucidated
disease in whole animal models, usually in murine trans- using cell-free models. By contrast, it is likely that the
genics. In addition to these widely used systems, several mechanics of other aspects of normal and abnormal tau
other cellular

Chunk 15:
pecies [96], and the inhibition of filament
then testing their relevance to the pathogenesis of human formation by exogenous agents [97] have been elucidated
disease in whole animal models, usually in murine trans- using cell-free models. By contrast, it is likely that the
genics. In addition to these widely used systems, several mechanics of other aspects of normal and abnormal tau
other cellular and whole animal models which offer addi- function,inparticularthosehavingtodowithtau/membrane
tionaltechnicaladvantagesinmodelingtauopathy(lamprey, interactions, are far less well understood than are tau/MT
nematode, zebrafish, fruit fly) are discussed. These models interactionsandtaupolymerizationprimarilybecauseofthe
willbeconsideredroughlyinorderofincreasingcomplexity difficulty of studying them adequately in cell-free systems.
below, and will be preceded by a brief discussion of the The major limitation of cell-free systems in modeling the
simplest type of model of all: the cell-free (in vitro) model. normalcellbiologyoftauandthatoftauopathythusappears
tobetheirincompleteness.Thus,invitromodelingisclearly
anessentialtoolforreachingadetailedunderstandingofthe
5. Cell-free models of tau function and dysfunction mechanisms by which tau interacts with specific cellular
elements. However, more complex models involving live
Overthepast25years,invitrostudiesofthepropertiesof cells are required in order to identify and place in
humantauhaveresultedinadetailedunderstandingofmany perspective the importance of the various points of
aspects of both normal and abnormal tau functions. In interaction between the aggregation and modification of
particular, the ability of tau to modify MTstability and MT tau deposits and the normal physiological processes of the
bundle formation and the ability of tau phosphorylation to neurons which contain them.
alter this ability have been heavily studied in vitro [42,82–
84]. The models used in such studies consist of purified
tubulin, tau protein

Chunk 16:
nteraction between the aggregation and modification of
particular, the ability of tau to modify MTstability and MT tau deposits and the normal physiological processes of the
bundle formation and the ability of tau phosphorylation to neurons which contain them.
alter this ability have been heavily studied in vitro [42,82–
84]. The models used in such studies consist of purified
tubulin, tau protein and the cofactors necessary for MT 6. Cellular models
polymerization. More recently, various conditions and
cofactorsthatpermittaupolymerizationhavebeenidentified, A general virtue of cellular models is that they offer a
as well as their relevance to the cellular environment(s) in relativelyeasy,accessibleandflexibleapproachtomodeling
whichtauaggregatesforminhumantauopathiesconsidered. complexeventsthataredefinedatthelevelofasinglecell.By
Ithasbeenknownsincetheearly1990sthatgivenasufficient their very nature, cellular models of diseases with complex
concentration of tau protein, it is possible to induce the etiology arelimited and incomplete;theycanreplicate only
polymerization of human tau into filaments that resemble thatpartofthediseaseprocesswhichdevelopsautonomously
those seen in the tauopathies and in AD [85,86]. Since that within a given cell. However, since the defining event of
time, a number of cofactors, including heparin and related almostallhumantauopathiesisthegenerationofintracellular
proteoglycans [87–89], fatty acids [90,91], and RNA [92], tau aggregates, cellular systems, and in particular, cultured
havebeenidentifiedwhichpermitthepolymerizationoftau cell lines, are highly appropriate for modeling the cytopa-
under physiological or near physiological conditions of pH thology of tauopathies. Just as the highly defined and
and electrolyte concentrations. In addition, a number of incomplete nature of in vitro models makes possible a
tauopathy-associated modifications have been studied and detailedelucidationoftheinteractionsbetweentauandother
evaluatedinterm

Chunk 17:
are highly appropriate for modeling the cytopa-
under physiological or near physiological conditions of pH thology of tauopathies. Just as the highly defined and
and electrolyte concentrations. In addition, a number of incomplete nature of in vitro models makes possible a
tauopathy-associated modifications have been studied and detailedelucidationoftheinteractionsbetweentauandother
evaluatedintermsofwhethertheymightinhibitthenormal specific cellular elements, the limited scope of cellular
turnover of tau. Finally, cell-free models have been heavily modelscanbe considered advantageous inthat it simplifies
used over the past few years to study the properties of tau experimental design and interpretation. Relationships
isoforms containing mutations that have been shown to between individual cellular events that are identified by
induce familial tauopathies by comparing their properties manipulationsofcellulartauopathymodelscanthenbetested
with corresponding wild-type tau isoforms. These studies fortheirmoregeneralapplicabilityinwholeanimalmodels.
have shown that most such btauopathy mutationsQ cause It should be noted that not all cellular models of tau
either an acceleration of tau filament formation relative to function involve cell culture; for instance, certain differ-
wild type at a particular tau concentration [93,94] or a entiated cell types with established advantages (size,
decreaseintheabilityoftautobindtoandstabilizeMTsin accessibility, simplicity) for studying tau biology such as
vitro[95]. Xenopus oocytes have used to quantify the ability of wild-
Cell-free models give the experimenter the power to type and mutant human tau isoforms to interact with MTs
eliminate uncontrolled variables and thus tend to generate participating ina stereotyped developmental event [98]. An
very detailed and well-defined information. However, this in situ cellular model of tauopathy has been developed by
approach tends to limit the field of study to aspects of tau theauthorandh

Chunk 18:
 give the experimenter the power to type and mutant human tau isoforms to interact with MTs
eliminate uncontrolled variables and thus tend to generate participating ina stereotyped developmental event [98]. An
very detailed and well-defined information. However, this in situ cellular model of tauopathy has been developed by
approach tends to limit the field of study to aspects of tau theauthorandhiscolleaguesusingidentifiedneuronsinthe

---PAGE BREAK---

230 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
ammocoete sea lamprey; this is described in detail below. are well-studied lines such as PC12 and SY5Y cells. A
For a variety of historical and practical reasons, however, major strength of neuronally derived cell lines as
most systems used to model tauopathy at the cellular level tauopathy models is that they can be induced to differ-
havebeenbasedonimmortalizedcelllinesofbothneuronal entiate in culture into non-mitotic cells with a neuronal
and non-neuronal origin, which are differentiated and phenotype. This makes it theoretically possible to study
cultured in vitro. the effects of tauopathy-associated alterations on neuron-
specific cellular elements (synapses, dendrites, axons,
dendritic/axonal MTs) which are key targets of cytopa-
7. Non neuronal cell lines in culture thological events in tauopathies. These models also
permit the study of interactions between overexpressed
Anexampleofaverysimplesystemwhichcanbeviewed human tau and cellular functions which are particularly
asalogicalextensionofinvitrostudiesoftaufunctionisthe important in neurons, such as dynein/kinesin-mediated
insect-derived SF9 cell line, which can be transfected with transport mechanisms [113]. The practical advantages that
constructs expressing exogenous human tau using the cell culture models have over other model types (ease of
baculovirus transfection system. SF9 cells not only lack use, completeness on a cellular level combined with
endogenoustaubutalsolackintermediatefilam

Chunk 19:
ynein/kinesin-mediated
insect-derived SF9 cell line, which can be transfected with transport mechanisms [113]. The practical advantages that
constructs expressing exogenous human tau using the cell culture models have over other model types (ease of
baculovirus transfection system. SF9 cells not only lack use, completeness on a cellular level combined with
endogenoustaubutalsolackintermediatefilaments,andcan relative simplicity) have stimulated the development of
be induced to generate long axon-like processes by trans- several important refinements in such models. These
fection with human tau [99]. These processes appear to include the use of human cell lines and elaborate
contain little but MT bundles and tau protein, and thus are culturing and differentiation conditions to produce fully
ideal for studying the effects of tau on MT spacing and differentiated, long-lived human neurons in culture
stability in the context of process formation. Recently this [112,114–116], and the development of stably transfected
systemhasalsobeenusedtoexaminetheeffectsoftauopathic human-derived cell lines in which tau expression can be
mutationsinthetaucodingsequenceontau/MTinteractions induced at will by addition of a small-molecule inducer
invivo[100]. to the culture medium [117,118]. These advances now
A variety of other non-neuronal cell lines have proven make it possible to partially overcome two serious
usefulastauopathymodels,includingfibroblastlinessuchas limitations of stably transfected neuronal cell lines as
3T3andLcells[101],Coscells,[102]andCHOcells[76]. tauopathy models; i.e., the time limitation imposed on
Such systems have traditionally been heavily used by cell experiments in which events that take years to occur are
biologists and have the advantages of being very well being modeled, and the disruptive effects of continuous
characterizedandeasytouseinstudiesusingmanydifferent exogenous tau expression during differentiation.
cellbiologicalandbiochemicaltechniques.The

Chunk 20:
the time limitation imposed on
Such systems have traditionally been heavily used by cell experiments in which events that take years to occur are
biologists and have the advantages of being very well being modeled, and the disruptive effects of continuous
characterizedandeasytouseinstudiesusingmanydifferent exogenous tau expression during differentiation.
cellbiologicalandbiochemicaltechniques.Thefactthattau
islargelylocalizedtothenervoussystemmakescertainnon-
neuronalcellsandcelllinesareidealsystemsforexamining 9. Primary culture models
the properties of exogenous human tau in the absence of
endogenous tau. This facilitates analyses of the normal Finally, primary neuron culture is an additional
propertiesofhumantauasaMAP,allowingforthestudyof approach that can be taken to ensure that a fully
the properties of each region of the tau protein via the differentiated neuronal phenotype is present, which can
systematic use of deletion mutants of human tau isoforms be a critical factor in studies of normal functions of tau,
[25,103–105]. Such models have also proven particularly such as the developmental sorting of tau and other MAPs
useful for validating the results of in vitro experiments in a between axons and dendrites [28,29,119]. Primary neu-
cellularcontext.Forexample,theeffectsofcodingsequence rons have generally not been used as tauopathy models
tauopathy mutations on both tau/MT interactions and tau due to the laboriousness and variability inherent in
filament formation have been extensively examined in isolating them, and in particular, difficulties in trans-
cellularmodels,withtheresultsofthesestudiesbeingmostly fecting them. However, primary cultures derived from
congruentwithsimilarinvitrostudies[89,103–110].Finally, transgenic mice may become a very important approach
non-neuronalcelllinesareidealforexaminingtheeffectsof to tauopathy modeling, as discussed further below
overexpressing exogenous human tau isoforms bearing [120,121].
tauopathy-specific modifi

Chunk 21:
odels,withtheresultsofthesestudiesbeingmostly fecting them. However, primary cultures derived from
congruentwithsimilarinvitrostudies[89,103–110].Finally, transgenic mice may become a very important approach
non-neuronalcelllinesareidealforexaminingtheeffectsof to tauopathy modeling, as discussed further below
overexpressing exogenous human tau isoforms bearing [120,121].
tauopathy-specific modifications, such as pseudophosphor- In summary, cell culture models of tauopathy offer a
ylation,withtheaimofevaluatingthecellulareffectsofthese significantly more complete reconstruction of how tau
modificationsrelativetounmodifiedtau[111,112]. interacts with cellular structures and other processes than
anyinvitromodels,permittingexperimentsthatrealistically
model interactions (tau-membrane, signal transduction)
8. Neuronal cell lines which cannot be reconstituted outside of intact cells in a
genuinely intracellular environment. Moreover, most cell
As is true for non-neuronal cell lines, the most popular culture tauopathy models are relatively easy to create,
neuronally derived cell lines for use as tauopathy models maintain and reproduce for future experimentation.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 231
10. Limitations of cultured cells as tauopathy models genetic background, large, accessible cell type) are also
idealforinsitumicroinjection,wechosethislastapproach.
While cell culture-based models of tauopathy are We chose to model human tauopathy in a set of giant
significantly more complete than cell-free models in identified neurons (Anterior Bulbar Cells or ABCs) in the
reproducing the cellular conditions under which tauopathic hindbrain of the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. In this
diseases develop in human patients, the impossibility of model,humantauischronicallyoverexpressedinABCsvia
replicating in culture the normal extracellular environment the intracellular microinjection of plasmids encoding a
of neurons in situ impose

Chunk 22:
erior Bulbar Cells or ABCs) in the
reproducing the cellular conditions under which tauopathic hindbrain of the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. In this
diseases develop in human patients, the impossibility of model,humantauischronicallyoverexpressedinABCsvia
replicating in culture the normal extracellular environment the intracellular microinjection of plasmids encoding a
of neurons in situ imposes inherent limits to how closely human tau isoform tagged at the N terminal with Green
cultured neurons can resemble neurons in situ. As a Fluorescent Protein (EGFP). Injected ABCs will then
consequence, such systems remain incomplete models of express tau over a period of several months, during which
tauopathy at the cellular level. Perhaps the most critical time the tau becomes hyperphosphorylated, forms filamen-
failing ofculturedcelllinesascellular models oftauopathy tous aggregates, and induces a series of degenerative
is the extreme difficulty that has been encountered in the changes, including dendritic MT and synapse loss. The
attempts to produce NFT-like tau aggregates in cultured sequence of events induced by tau overexpression in ABCs
cells.Overthepast15years,repeatedunsuccessfulattempts bears a reasonable resemblance to the cytodegenerative
have been made to generate tau aggregates in culture using sequenceseeninAD[36,37],andneuropathologicallesions
suchstrategiesasgeneratinghighlevelsofwild-typehuman seen in other tauopathies [33–35]. This model thus offers
tau expression with powerful expression vectors, treatment significant advantages over cell culture models in that it
with relevant kinases and with broad-spectrum phosphatase features the development of filamentous tau aggregates
inhibitors such as okadaic acid [78]. While several resulting in a stereotyped, stageable pattern of neurofibril-
successfulattemptsatachievingthisgoalhaveveryrecently lary degeneration in a fully differentiated neuron in situ,
beenpublishedusingmutanttauisoforms[76,116,118,122], a

Chunk 23:
t it
with relevant kinases and with broad-spectrum phosphatase features the development of filamentous tau aggregates
inhibitors such as okadaic acid [78]. While several resulting in a stereotyped, stageable pattern of neurofibril-
successfulattemptsatachievingthisgoalhaveveryrecently lary degeneration in a fully differentiated neuron in situ,
beenpublishedusingmutanttauisoforms[76,116,118,122], againstanon-transgenicbackground.Tau-expressingABCs
orbycoincubationwithbetaamyloid[122],thedifficultyof are classified as belonging to Stages 1–4 of degeneration
achieving this central goal of tauopathy modeling (accord- based on the extent of dendritic degeneration [125,126].
ingtotheTangleHypothesis)remainsacriticalweaknessof An additional advantage of the ABCs system as a
the cell culture approach to generating cellular tauopathy tauopathy model system is its ready accessibility in situ.
models.Overthepastfewyears,theauthorandco-workers This,combinedwiththelargesizeofABCs,makespossible
havedevelopedaninsitucellularmodeloftauopathywhich experiments in which physical manipulations such as
overcomes the above difficulty, and which is described microinjection can be performed repeatedly on the same
below. cell.Forexample,wehadpreviouslyfoundthatchronictau
overexpression induces a significant distortion and pruning
of ABC dendrites and the loss of dendritic MTs and
11. An in situ cellular model of tauopathy impinging synapses [73,74]. We then determined whether
this dendritic distortion was accompanied by the physical
There are a number of requirements which must be met obstruction and isolation of distal dendrites by micro-
inordertogenerateasinglecelltauopathymodelwhichcan injecting a low molecular weight fluorescent dye (Alexa
be studied in situ, and to overcome the primary difficulty 488) into 10 EGFP-positive ABCs in intact lampreys. The
encounteredwiththecellularmodelsdescribedabove.Since movement of fluorescent label into the distal dendrites of
tau aggregations are fo

Chunk 24:
nd isolation of distal dendrites by micro-
inordertogenerateasinglecelltauopathymodelwhichcan injecting a low molecular weight fluorescent dye (Alexa
be studied in situ, and to overcome the primary difficulty 488) into 10 EGFP-positive ABCs in intact lampreys. The
encounteredwiththecellularmodelsdescribedabove.Since movement of fluorescent label into the distal dendrites of
tau aggregations are found preferentially or exclusively in such cells was attenuated or abolished in dendrites exhibit-
neuronalorglialcellsinhumantauopathies,thecelltypeto ing distortion and/or beading (Fig. 2). This obstruction of
bestudiedmustbederivedfromthesecelltypes.Ideallythe distal dendrites by tau deposits (and/or a localized cytoske-
modelshouldbeneuronal,ifthegoalistogenerateamodel letal collapse caused by chronic tau expression) might be
that can be used to characterize the bcoreQ cytopathological expected to lead to the metabolic isolation of distal
events common to all tauopathies, since some tauopathic dendrites, which in turn would account for the observed
conditionssuchasADdonotfeatureglialtangles.Asecond distaltoproximalpatternofdegenerativedendriticchanges.
requirementisthattheneurontypechosenshouldbereadily The accessibility of ABCs thus makes it possible to
accessible to transfection with vectors that overexpress correlate the results of multiple manipulations in a single
exogenous human tau. Exogenous tau expression can be identified neuron, facilitating the detailed dissection of
accomplished in neurons in situ by a number of different relationships between the accumulation of tau and its
means. These include: (a) creating a transgenic, (b) trans- pathological consequences.
fecting a scattered population of neurons in a juvenile While the ABC model offers a number of advantages
animalusingaviralvector[123],(c)injectinganembryonic over cultured cell lines as a cellular tauopathy model, it
precursortoasetofcellsfatedtodevelopasneurons[124], imposes significant limitations a

Chunk 25:
u and its
means. These include: (a) creating a transgenic, (b) trans- pathological consequences.
fecting a scattered population of neurons in a juvenile While the ABC model offers a number of advantages
animalusingaviralvector[123],(c)injectinganembryonic over cultured cell lines as a cellular tauopathy model, it
precursortoasetofcellsfatedtodevelopasneurons[124], imposes significant limitations as well. Only a few cells
or (d) microinjecting vectors directly into post-mitotic, express tau in the brain of any one lamprey (there are six
differentiatedneurons.Sincethefeatureswhichmakeacell ABCs per animal), making conventional biochemical
type desirable as a tauopathy model in situ (i.e., non-tg analyses impossible. In addition, the long life cycle (10

---PAGE BREAK---

232 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
Fig. 2. Dendritic distortionand degenerationcaused by chronic human tau overexpression resultsin the functionalisolationof distal dendrites.A 10-Am
transversesectionthroughthedistaldendriticfieldofanABC66dayswasmicroinjectedwithaplasmidencodingtheshortesthumantauisoform(taggedatthe
NterminalwithEGFP),withexpressiondrivenbythecytomegaloviruspromoter[74].InordertotesttheintracellularcontinuityoftauexpressingABCs,the
lowMWdyeAlexa488(MolecularProbes)wasinjected1hpriortofixationfor2hinFAA[138],whichinthissystemabolishesallEGFPfluorescence.All
left-handpanelsshowthesamesectionafterimmunostainingwiththephosphotau-specificmAbPHF-1(generouslyprovidedbyDr.PeterDavies)ofdendrites
fromABCsexpressingEGFP-taggedtau.Rightpanelsshowthesamesectionspriortoimmunocytochemistry,showingAlexa488fluorescence.Magnified
viewsoftheregionsmarked1and2areshownatthebottomleftandbottomright,respectively.WefoundthatwhileAlexa488diffusedrapidlythroughoutthe
entire dendritic trees of control cells (not shown), and relatively normal dendrites of tau expressing cells (Alexa image, inset 2), the spread of Alexa488
fluorescenceintomanydistaldendritesinABCsinStage2orlaterwasobs

Chunk 26:
tochemistry,showingAlexa488fluorescence.Magnified
viewsoftheregionsmarked1and2areshownatthebottomleftandbottomright,respectively.WefoundthatwhileAlexa488diffusedrapidlythroughoutthe
entire dendritic trees of control cells (not shown), and relatively normal dendrites of tau expressing cells (Alexa image, inset 2), the spread of Alexa488
fluorescenceintomanydistaldendritesinABCsinStage2orlaterwasobstructed(asterisks,inset1,carets,toppanelsandinset2).Alexafillingofdistorted
dendritesshowsexamplesofpartialandcompleteobstruction(asterisks,inset1)andgrosslythickenedregionssurroundingnormallyappearingdendritesthat
labelwithPHF-1butexcludeAlexa(arrows,inset2)suggesttheexistenceofthick,perimembranousdepositsoftau-positivematerial.Scalebar:50Am.
yearsormore)andstabilityoftheammocoetelampreybrain models epitomize the complementary nature of these
makebothgeneticanddevelopmentalstudiesinthissystem models, which permit different types of manipulations at
impractical. The ABC model also shares with many non- the single cell level, and result in responses that must be
murine and tg and cellular models the weaknesses of analyzed using quite different techniques.
containing an endogenous tau homologue which continues
to be expressed in ABCs which are also expressing human
tau, and of being relatively phylogenetically distant from 12. Cellular versus whole animal models of tauopathy
humans. According to the Tangle Hypothesis, however,
theseweaknessesshouldberelativelyunimportant,sincethe The scope and investigative goals of whole animal
normal functions of tau are not critical to tauopathy tauopathy models, such as murine transgenics, are very
cytopathogenesis. Moreover, tau is a phylogenetically different from (and complementary to) those of cellular
diverse protein, varying significantly among mammalian models, and thus impose very different practical require-
species, while the proteins with which tau has been shown ments and simplify assumptions on the experimenter, as
to interac

Chunk 27:
auopathy models, such as murine transgenics, are very
cytopathogenesis. Moreover, tau is a phylogenetically different from (and complementary to) those of cellular
diverse protein, varying significantly among mammalian models, and thus impose very different practical require-
species, while the proteins with which tau has been shown ments and simplify assumptions on the experimenter, as
to interact in tauopathies (signal transduction related discussed below.
kinases, PP2a, tubulin, actin etc.) are bhousekeepingQ In constructing and using a cellular model, the inves-
proteins which vary little among animal species. On the tigator tacitly assumes that the key events driving the
whole,thestrengthsandweaknessesoflampreyABCsasan cytopathogenesis of tauopathy are essentially cell-autono-
in situ cellular tauopathy model versus those of cell culture mous. The contributions of variations in cell type and the

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 233
immense variations in transsynaptic connections between relative scopes of these models creates potential difficulties
differentgroupsofneuronsinsituareignored,despiteclear with the interpretation of information derived from cellular
evidence for the importance of these factors in AD [127] modelsinthecontextoftgmice,andviceversa.Onewayof
andtheirlikelyimportanceinothertauopathiesaswell.The partially overcoming this gap has very recently been
justification for doing this is contained in another assump- demonstrated by the production of an in situ tauopathy
tion that is stated explicitly in the Tangle Hypothesis: i.e., model in the rat [128], in which rat forebrain neurons were
that there is a single fundamental cytopathological mecha- transfected in situ with a human tau isoform containing the
nism by which all abnormalities in the coding sequence, P301L mutation, and thus induced to generate NFTs,
expression and posttranslational modification of tau protein neuropilthreadsandothercellularf

Chunk 28:
le Hypothesis: i.e., model in the rat [128], in which rat forebrain neurons were
that there is a single fundamental cytopathological mecha- transfected in situ with a human tau isoform containing the
nism by which all abnormalities in the coding sequence, P301L mutation, and thus induced to generate NFTs,
expression and posttranslational modification of tau protein neuropilthreadsandothercellularfeaturesofneurofibrillary
induceneuronaldegenerationanddeath.Thisassumptionin degeneration. This approach shares some of the advantages
turn requires that the typical variations in the morphology enjoyed by the lamprey ABC model over murine trans-
anddistributionoftaudepositsseenindifferenttauopathies genics as a cellular model discussed above (tau-induced
(NFTs,Pickbodies,coiledbodies,neuropilthreads,etc.)are neurofibrillarylesionsareproducedinindividualneuronsin
due to variations in levels of tau expression, cell type and situ in a non-tg background, large cell size and physical
synaptic connectivity. These simplifying assumptions are accessibility to further experimentation in situ). Most
most useful if the cellular model in question is highly importantly, it also creates a multicellular model in which
stereotyped (either an identified neuron or a stable cell line small-scale transcellular interactions between tau positive
that has been differentiated under uniform conditions), and neurons and between transfected and non-transfected
if manipulations of the extracellular environment are kept neurons can potentially be examined. Consequently, there
simple, well controlled, and highly relevant to specific is considerable potential for ad hoc non-tg in situ models
aspects of tau-induced cytopathology (for example, the such as this to model transsynaptic influences between
effects of extracellular beta amyloid oligomers on the neurons in human tauopathies of the cellular level in a
activity of specific signal transduction-related kinases). manner presently not possible in othe

Chunk 29:
ly relevant to specific is considerable potential for ad hoc non-tg in situ models
aspects of tau-induced cytopathology (for example, the such as this to model transsynaptic influences between
effects of extracellular beta amyloid oligomers on the neurons in human tauopathies of the cellular level in a
activity of specific signal transduction-related kinases). manner presently not possible in other systems.
Bycontrast,thegreaterscopeofwholeanimaltauopathy
models requires the experimenter to consider very different
issues and make different (and far more complex) simplify- 14. Transgenic non-murine whole animal models
ing assumptions in creating and using such models than
would be true of a cellular model. Most whole animal The difficulty of integrating information derived from
models of tauopathy attempt to recreate the entire devel- cellularandwhole-animalmodels mayalso beovercome to
opmental sequence of neuropathological events in human some extent by using some recently developed simpler tg
tauopathy, including behavioral manifestations of disease, animal models of tauopathy which permit at least some
andsuchmodelsmustinadditionhaveneuronalorglialcell aspects of tauopathy pathogenesis to be analyzed at the
populationswhichexhibitappropriatecytopathology.Issues cellular level in the context of their effects on a whole
that are explicitly ignored in cell models (such as the animal in situ.
differencesinrelativesusceptibilitytotau-inducedNFDthat
exist between various neuron types, and whether trans-
synaptic influences play a part in contributing to these 15. Invertebrate tg models
differences)become central foci ofinterest inwholeanimal
tauopathy models. A particular challenge for creating The use of non-mammalian transgenics as tauopathy
complex, ambitions whole-animal models is controlling models entail a tradeoff between the complexity (and by
the spatiotemporal distribution of tau expression levels extension, completeness) of the system being used versus
amonga

Chunk 30:
g models
differences)become central foci ofinterest inwholeanimal
tauopathy models. A particular challenge for creating The use of non-mammalian transgenics as tauopathy
complex, ambitions whole-animal models is controlling models entail a tradeoff between the complexity (and by
the spatiotemporal distribution of tau expression levels extension, completeness) of the system being used versus
amongavarietyofneuronalandglialpopulations,andthus the expense, ease of use, and resolution of the information
replicating in the model the expression patterns seen in derived. This tradeoff is most marked in invertebrate
normal humans and/or in any of the various human models. Two of the best studied organisms in invertebrate
tauopathies. neurobiology (the nematode C. elegans and the fruit fly D.
melanogaster) have recently been used to create transgenic
tauopathy models using normal and mutant human tau
13. A non-transgenic, multi-cell model of tauopathy isoforms [129–131]. Both of these systems have two types
of technical and scientific advantage not found in tg mice
The above discussion contrasting the scope of cellular which permit experimental manipulations at the single cell
andwholeanimaltauopathymodelsisprimarilyinreference level. These are (a) identified neurons with specifically
to cell culture models on the one hand, versus murine tg defineddevelopmentaloriginsandstereotypedmorphology,
models on the other hand, and emphasizes the large, often physiology and synaptic connectivity, and (b) advantages
nonoverlapping differences between the strengths and favoringextensive,rapidanddetailedgeneticmanipulations
weaknesses of each type of model and the kinds of (shortgenerationtimes,smallgenome,simplerCNS,ability
questions that can be asked of them. The gap between the to screen for mutants). The ability to induce and analyze

---PAGE BREAK---

234 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
genetic mutations which produce reproducible changes in biology and pa

Chunk 31:
ddetailedgeneticmanipulations
weaknesses of each type of model and the kinds of (shortgenerationtimes,smallgenome,simplerCNS,ability
questions that can be asked of them. The gap between the to screen for mutants). The ability to induce and analyze

---PAGE BREAK---

234 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
genetic mutations which produce reproducible changes in biology and pathobiology at the cellular level with our
individual cells of both thefruit fly and thenematode more knowledge of the developmental and intercellular influen-
than makes up for the small size of these organisms, which ces that shape the pathogenesis of tauopathies at the
prevents physical manipulations in situ. The fly model may organismal level. Another general advantage of simpler tg
already have produced information that is of general models over tg mice is that they greatly decrease the
relevance to the cytopathology of tau-induced neurodegen- amount of time, labor and expense associated with
eration, since the overexpression of human tau isoforms in generating, maintaining and using experimental animals,
Drosophila results in neuronal death, but not in tau which may be an important advantage in using such
aggregates [130]. It is unclear whether this is due to a systems for preliminary screens of potential therapeutic
fundamental difference between neurons in the fly and in agents.
humans,suchasthelackofNFs(andcorrespondinglylarge
numbers of MTs) in insect neurons, or if this result is an
indication of the existence of a hitherto overlooked 17. Murine transgenics
tauopathymechanismwhichdoesnotinvolvetauaggregate
formation. As mentioned above, familial tauopathies in The focus of the present review has been to identify
which tau aggregates are absent have been described [81] ways in which information derived from non-murine
and information directly relevant to this type of tauopathy tauopathy models can complement, reinforce and extend
mightthereforebeforthcomingfromafly

Chunk 32:
nismwhichdoesnotinvolvetauaggregate
formation. As mentioned above, familial tauopathies in The focus of the present review has been to identify
which tau aggregates are absent have been described [81] ways in which information derived from non-murine
and information directly relevant to this type of tauopathy tauopathy models can complement, reinforce and extend
mightthereforebeforthcomingfromaflytauopathymodel. that derived from tg mouse model systems. This is because
It is worth noting in this context that perturbed neurofila- tauopathy models derived from transgenically manipulated
ment distributions have been observed in neurons under- mice are by far the most prevalent whole animal tauopathy
going tau-induced neurofibrillary degeneration in tg mice, models presently in use, and thus constitute the bgold
lamprey ABCs, and in human AD patients [73,75,132]. By standardQ to which other tauopathy models are to be
contrast, tau overexpression failed to generate the expected compared. There are many reasons for this pre-eminence
number of tau aggregates in tg mouse lines lacking of tg mice as tauopathy models. The laboratory mouse is
neurofilaments [133]. the premier experimental system in biomedical research,
and as such, its biology is the best understood of all
mammalian (and vertebrate) animals, as is the technology
16. Lower vertebrate tauopathy models for developing and manipulating murine transgenics.
Murine tg models of tauopathy are also the most complete
Whole-animal tauopathy models derived from lower and most phylogenetically similar models to humans that
vertebrate systems might be expected to offer some, but can be used practically by large numbers of scientists to
not all, of the same benefits as the invertebrate systems study human tauopathy. Over the past few years, the
described above, in exchange for greater complexity and expression wild-type and mutant isoforms of human tau in
phylogenenetic similarity to humans. The single lower mice has resulted

Chunk 33:
te systems might be expected to offer some, but can be used practically by large numbers of scientists to
not all, of the same benefits as the invertebrate systems study human tauopathy. Over the past few years, the
described above, in exchange for greater complexity and expression wild-type and mutant isoforms of human tau in
phylogenenetic similarity to humans. The single lower mice has resulted in the development of NFT-like
vertebrate system presently being used to make tg filamentous deposits in a variety of neuronal and glial
tauopathy models, the zebrafish, by and large fits this populations over the life span of the mouse [75,135–137].
generalization [134]. In particular, this system retains some This has been accompanied by a broad range of
of the advantages of invertebrate tg systems, including behaviorally observable signs of progressive neurodegen-
feasibility of genetic manipulation, a well-studied, stereo- eration (reviewed in Refs. [7–10]). A current goal in this
typed pattern of development with embryos exhibiting a very active field is to develop murine models which
high degree of optical clarity, and the relative ease with address the remaining major weaknesses in tg mouse
which tg animals can be created and propagated compared models of tauopathy, i.e., the failure of current models to
to murine tg models. Most zebrafish neurons exhibit a cause the degree of neuronal degeneration and death seen
typical vertebrate multipolar morphology, making this a in human disease and their failure to reproduce human
particularly good system for studying the bnormalQ roles patterns of tau expression. Ultimately, tg mouse tauopathy
played by tau (and tau phosphorylation) during the models need to account for the characteristic distribution,
development of neuronal polarity and during initial axon morphology and isoform content of neurofibrillary lesions
outgrowth. The finding that mutant human tau isoforms, as seen in each of the various human tauopathies, and
wi

Chunk 34:
les patterns of tau expression. Ultimately, tg mouse tauopathy
played by tau (and tau phosphorylation) during the models need to account for the characteristic distribution,
development of neuronal polarity and during initial axon morphology and isoform content of neurofibrillary lesions
outgrowth. The finding that mutant human tau isoforms, as seen in each of the various human tauopathies, and
with the nematode and fruit fly, produce cytoskeletal correlate this with the nature of specific tauopathy
abnormalities resembling some of those seen in human mutations in tau. Ideally, this will involve the expression
tauopathies [134] suggests that the zebrafish model may be of human tau isoforms in mice null for murine tau under
particularly important in elucidating any developmental the control of the human tau promotor. This might best be
effects of btauopathyQ tau mutations in humans. Thus, it is attempted by using artificial chromosometechniques which
likely that the greatest direct value of all of these relatively permit the transfer of functional human genomic constructs
simple, non-mammalian tg systems as models for human to mice, resulting in normal human tau expression and
tauopathy will be the correlation our understanding of tau splicing patterns.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 235
The many advantages of murine tg models mentioned strengths of each to assemble a complete and multilevel
above have recently been expanded by the advent of overview of the problem at hand. A similar approach is
bcompositeQ modeling approaches in which tg tauopathy likely to prove useful in the identification of anti-tauopathy
mice have been used in the context of other modeling therapeutic agents, in which prospective drugs are screened
approaches. Examples of such studies include the use of forefficacyandthentoxicityfirstininvitrosystems,thenin
primary culture of neurons derived from tg mice [131], and cellularonesandfinallyinwholeanim

Chunk 35:
n which tg tauopathy likely to prove useful in the identification of anti-tauopathy
mice have been used in the context of other modeling therapeutic agents, in which prospective drugs are screened
approaches. Examples of such studies include the use of forefficacyandthentoxicityfirstininvitrosystems,thenin
primary culture of neurons derived from tg mice [131], and cellularonesandfinallyinwholeanimaltauopathymodels.
the injection of human beta amyloid into the brains of such One such compound that was recently identified as having
mice, resulting in the development of neurofibrillary anti-fibrillogenicactivityontauinaninvitroassay[97]has
pathology in the vicinity of the injection site [137]. The beenshowntoblocktau-inducedNFDinthelampreyABC
continualdevelopmentofnewapproachestoproducingand tauopathy model [126]. Thus, information derived from
using tg murine models greatly increases the versatility of many different model types is likely to continue contribu-
murine tg mice as tauopathy models, and seems likely to ting to our understanding of, and ultimately our ability to
maintain the position of this type of model at the center of treat, these devastating disorders.
NFD research.
References
18. Conclusion
[1] L.N. Clark, P. Poorkaj, Z. Wszolek, D.H. Geschwind, Z.S.
The experimental attributes required for cellular and
Nasreddine, et al., Pathogenic implications of mutations in the tau
wholeanimalmodelsofNFDareinherentlycomplementary
gene in pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration and related neurodege-
to and quite different from one another. The systematic nerativedisorderslinkedtochromosome17,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.
elucidationofthepathogenesisoftau-inducedNFDrequires U. S. A. 95 (1998) 13103–13107.
a multilevel approach involving a detailed analysis of both [2] T.D.Bird,E.M.Wijsman,D.Nochlin,M.Leehey,S.M.Sumi,etal.,
Chromosome17andhereditarydementia:linkagestudiesinfamily
the general cellular mechanisms underlying NFD at the
with a P301S mutation in tau, J. Neuropathol. E

Chunk 36:
edtochromosome17,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.
elucidationofthepathogenesisoftau-inducedNFDrequires U. S. A. 95 (1998) 13103–13107.
a multilevel approach involving a detailed analysis of both [2] T.D.Bird,E.M.Wijsman,D.Nochlin,M.Leehey,S.M.Sumi,etal.,
Chromosome17andhereditarydementia:linkagestudiesinfamily
the general cellular mechanisms underlying NFD at the
with a P301S mutation in tau, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 58
cellular level and cell type-specific considerations and
(1997)667–677.
intercellular/systemic interactions responsible for the char- [3] M.Goedert,R.A.Crowther,M.G.Spillantini,Taumutationscause
acteristicneuropathologicalandbehavioralchangesinduced frontotemporaldementias,Neuron21(1998)955–958.
by individual tauopathies. Understanding the former [4] L.A. Reed, M.L. Schmidt, Z.K. Wszolek, B.J. Balin, V. Soon-
tornniyomkij, et al., The neuropathology of a chromosome 17-
requires that we determine how the common features of
linked autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia (bpallido-
NFD are produced in a single cell type, requiring a cellular ponto-nigraldegenerationQ),J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol.57(1998)
model, while understanding the latter will require whole 588–601.
animal models in which tau accumulation and pathology [5] M. Hong, V. Zhukareva, V. Vogelsberg-Ragaglia, Z. Wszolek, L.
occur in the cell types that are characteristic of the human Reed, B.I. Miller, D.H. Geschwind, T.D. Bird, D. McKeel, A.
Goate, J.C. Morris, K.C. Wilhelmsen, G.D. Schellenberg, J.Q.
disease being considered. In particular, the use of cells
Trojanowski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Mutation-specific functional impair-
derived from murine transgenics as cellular models and
mentsindistincttauisoformsofhereditaryFTDP-17,Science282
other bcompositeQ approaches promise to begin addressing (1998) 1914–1917.
thegreatestweaknessoftauopathymodelsdevelopedsofar: [6] I. D’Souza, P. Poorkaj, M. Hong, D. Nochlin, V.M.-Y. Lee, et al.,
i.e.,thedifficultyofusinginformationderivedfromcellular Missense and silen

Chunk 37:
nctional impair-
derived from murine transgenics as cellular models and
mentsindistincttauisoformsofhereditaryFTDP-17,Science282
other bcompositeQ approaches promise to begin addressing (1998) 1914–1917.
thegreatestweaknessoftauopathymodelsdevelopedsofar: [6] I. D’Souza, P. Poorkaj, M. Hong, D. Nochlin, V.M.-Y. Lee, et al.,
i.e.,thedifficultyofusinginformationderivedfromcellular Missense and silent tau gene mutations cause frontotemporal
dementia with parkinsonism-chromosome 17 type, by affecting
and whole animal approaches in a common, context-free
multiple alternative RNA splicing regulatory elements, Proc. Natl.
manner.Theseapproachesemphasizethecentralimportance
Acad.Sci.U.S.A.96(1999)5598–5603.
ofdevelopingimprovedmurinetransgenicmodelsofhuman [7] L.Buee,T.Bussiere,V.Buee-Scherrer,A.Delacourte,P.R.Hof,Tau
tauopathiestoourfullunderstandingandtreatmentofthese protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative
conditions. However, it seems likely that simple, non- disorders,BrainRes.BrainRes.Rev.33(2000)95–130.
[8] J. Gftz, Tau and transgenic animal models, Brain Res. Brain Res.
murine tg model systems such as the worm, fly and
Rev.35(2001)266–286.
zebrafish, and in situ cellular models such as the lamprey
[9] V.M.-Y. Lee, M. Goedert, J.Q. Trojanowski, Neurodegenerative
and rodent models discussed in this paper will remain tauopathies,Annu.Rev.Neurosci.24(2001)1121–1159.
important as tauopathy models owing to the unique [10] A. Delacourte, N. Sergeant, L. Buee, In vitro models of neuro-
perspectives that they bring to our understanding of fibrillarydegeneration,Exp.Gerontol.38(2003)1309–1317.
[11] D.W.Cleveland,S.Y.Hwo,M.W.Kirschner,Physicalandchemical
tauopathy at both the cellular and organismal levels. The
properties of purified tau factor and the role of tau in microtubule
technical advantages (identified cells, accessibility, conven-
assembly,J.Mol.Biol.116(1977)227–247.
ience,etc.)thatsuchsystemsenjoyovermurinetransgenics [12] D.W. Cleveland, S.

Chunk 38:
on,Exp.Gerontol.38(2003)1309–1317.
[11] D.W.Cleveland,S.Y.Hwo,M.W.Kirschner,Physicalandchemical
tauopathy at both the cellular and organismal levels. The
properties of purified tau factor and the role of tau in microtubule
technical advantages (identified cells, accessibility, conven-
assembly,J.Mol.Biol.116(1977)227–247.
ience,etc.)thatsuchsystemsenjoyovermurinetransgenics [12] D.W. Cleveland, S.Y. Hwo, M.W. Kirschner, Purification of
and cell culture approaches, while narrow, are probably too tau, a microtubule-associated protein that induces assembly of
importantandfundamentaltobesupersededbyadvancesin microtubules from purified tubulin, J. Mol. Biol. 116 (1977)
207–225.
transgenictechnology.Rather,investigatorsareincreasingly
[13] G. Lindwall, R. Cole, The purification of Tau protein and the
likely to address particular aspects of tauopathy patho-
occurrence of two phosphorylation states of Tau in brain, J. Biol.
genesis in a variety of models, using the complementary Chem.259(1984)12241–12248.

---PAGE BREAK---

236 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
[14] G. Lee, N. Cowan, M.W. Kirschner, The primary structure and accumulationofabnormaltauisoforms(A68)proteins,Lab.Invest.
heterogeneityoftauproteinfrommousebrain,Science239(1988) 66 (1992) 212–221.
285–288. [33] S. Flament, A. Delacourte, M. Verny, J.J. Hauw, F. Javoy-Agid,
[15] M. Goedert, M.G. Spillantini, R. JakeS, D. Rutherford, R.A. Abnormaltauproteinsinprogressivesupranuclearpalsy.Similarities
Crowther, Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated and differences with the neurofibrillary degeneration of the
proteintau:sequencesandlocalizationinneurofibrillarytanglesof Alzheimertype,ActaNeuropathol.81(1991)591–596.
Alzheimer’sdisease,Neuron3(1989)519–526. [34] M.B. Feany, H. Ksiezak-Reding, W.K. Liu, I. Vincent, S.H. Yen,
[16] A. Himmler, D. Drechsel, M.W. Kirschner, D.W. Martin, Tau D.W.Dickson,Epitopeexpressionandhyperphosphorylationoftau
consistsof a set of proteins withrepeat

Chunk 39:
y degeneration of the
proteintau:sequencesandlocalizationinneurofibrillarytanglesof Alzheimertype,ActaNeuropathol.81(1991)591–596.
Alzheimer’sdisease,Neuron3(1989)519–526. [34] M.B. Feany, H. Ksiezak-Reding, W.K. Liu, I. Vincent, S.H. Yen,
[16] A. Himmler, D. Drechsel, M.W. Kirschner, D.W. Martin, Tau D.W.Dickson,Epitopeexpressionandhyperphosphorylationoftau
consistsof a set of proteins withrepeated C-terminal microtubule- protein in corticobasal degeneration: differentiation from progres-
bindingdomainsandvariableN-terminaldomains,Mol.Cell.Biol.9 sive supranuclear palsy, Acta Neuropathol. 90 (1995) 37–43.
(1989)1381–1388. [35] M.B.Feany,L.A.Mattiace,D.W.Dickson,Neuropathologicoverlap
[17] G.Lee,R.L.Neve,K.S.Kosik,Themicrotubulebindingdomainof of progressive supranuclear palsy, Pick’s disease and corticobasal
tauprotein,Neuron2(1989)1615–1624. degeneration,J.Neuropathol.Exp.Neurol.55(1996)53–67.
[18] D.N. Drechsel, A.A. Hyman, M.H. Cobb, M.W. Kirschner, [36] C. Bancher, C. Brunner, H. Lassmann, H. Budka, K. Jellinger, G.
Modulation of the dynamic instability of tubulin assembly by Wiche,F.Seitelberger,I.Grundke-Iqbal,K.Iqbal,H.M.Wisniewski,
the microtubule-associated protein tau, Mol. Biol. Cell 3 (1992) Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated Tau precedes the
1141–1154. formation of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease, Brain
[19] J.M. Litersky, G.V. Johnson, Phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent Res.477(1989)90–99.
protein kinase inhibits the degradation of tau by calpain, J. Biol. [37] E.Braak,H.Braak,E.-M.Mandelkow,Asequenceofcytoskeleton
Chem.267(1992)1563–1568. changes related to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles and
[20] J.J.Pei,I.Grundke-Iqbal,K.Iqbal,N.Bogdanovic,B.Winblad,R.F. neuropilthreads,ActaNeuropathol.87(1994)554–567.
Cowburn, Accumulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) in [38] V.M.-Y.Lee,B.J.Balin,L.OtvosJr.,J.Q.Trojanowski,A68:amajor
neurons with early stages of Alzheimer’s disease neurofibrillary subunitofpairedhelicalfilament

Chunk 40:
. changes related to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles and
[20] J.J.Pei,I.Grundke-Iqbal,K.Iqbal,N.Bogdanovic,B.Winblad,R.F. neuropilthreads,ActaNeuropathol.87(1994)554–567.
Cowburn, Accumulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) in [38] V.M.-Y.Lee,B.J.Balin,L.OtvosJr.,J.Q.Trojanowski,A68:amajor
neurons with early stages of Alzheimer’s disease neurofibrillary subunitofpairedhelicalfilamentsandderivatizedformsofnormal
degeneration,BrainRes.797(1998)267–277. Tau,Science251(1990)675–678.
[21] J.Kuret,G.S.Johnson,D.Cha,E.R.Christenson,A.J.DeMaggio, [39] S.G.Greenberg,P.Davies,J.D.Stein,L.I.Binder,Hydrofluoricacid
M.F. Hoekstra, Casein kinase 1 is tightly associated with paired- treated PHF proteins display the same biochemical properties as
helicalfilamentsisolatedfromAlzheimer’sdiseasebrain,J.Neuro- normaltau,J.Biol.Chem.267(1992)564–569.
chem.69(1999)2506–2515. [40] G.Drewes,E.-M.Mandelkow,K.Baumann,J.Goris,W.Merlevede,
[22] G.A.Jicha,C.Weaver,E.Lane,C.Vianna,Y.Kress,J.Rockwood, E. Mandelkow, Dephosphorylation of tau protein and Alzheimer
P.Davies,cAMP-dependentproteinkinasephosphorylationsontau paired helical filaments by calcineurin and phosphatase-2A, FEBS
inAlzheimer’sdisease,J.Neurosci.19(1999)7486–7494. Lett.336(1993)425–432.
[23] G.B.Drewes,F.Lichtenberg-Kraag,E.Doering,E.-M.Mandelkow, [41] J.H.Cho,G.V.Johnson,PrimedphosphorylationoftauatThr231by
J. Biernat, J. Goris, M. Doree, E. Mandelkow, Mitogen activated glycogensynthasekinase3beta(GSK3beta)playsacriticalrolein
protein(MAP)kinasetransformstauproteinintoanAlzheimer-like regulating tau’s ability to bind and stabilize microtubules, J.
state,EMBOJ.11(1992)2131–2138. Neurochem.88(2004)49–58.
[24] G.B.Drewes,B.Trinczek,S.Illenberger,BiernatG.Schmitt-Ulms, [42] G.Li,H.Yin,J.Kuret,Caseinkinase1deltaphosphorylatesTauand
H.E. Meyer, E.-M. Mandelkow, E. Mandelkow, Microtubule-asso- disruptsitsbindingtomicrotubules,J.Biol.Chem.(2004)(inpress).
ciated protein/microtubule affinityregulating kinase (p110mark). A 

Chunk 41:
stabilize microtubules, J.
state,EMBOJ.11(1992)2131–2138. Neurochem.88(2004)49–58.
[24] G.B.Drewes,B.Trinczek,S.Illenberger,BiernatG.Schmitt-Ulms, [42] G.Li,H.Yin,J.Kuret,Caseinkinase1deltaphosphorylatesTauand
H.E. Meyer, E.-M. Mandelkow, E. Mandelkow, Microtubule-asso- disruptsitsbindingtomicrotubules,J.Biol.Chem.(2004)(inpress).
ciated protein/microtubule affinityregulating kinase (p110mark). A [43] J.Biernat,N.Gustke,G.Drewes,E.-M.Mandelkow,E.Mandelkow,
novelproteinkinasethatregulatestau-microtubuleinteractionsand Phosphorylation of Ser262 strongly, reduces binding of tau to
dynamicinstabilitybyphosphorylationattheAlzheimer-specificsite microtubules: distinction between PHF-like immunoreactivity and
serine262,J.Biol.Chem.270(1995)7679–7688. microtubulebinding,Neuron11(1993)153–163.
[25] R.Brandt,J.Leger,G.Lee,Interactionoftauwiththeneuralplasma [44] G.T.Bramblett,M.Goedert,R.Jakes,S.E.Merrick,J.Q.Trojanow-
membrane mediated by tau’s amino-terminal projection domain, J. ski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Abnormal tau phosphorylation at Ser396 in
CellBiol.131(1995)1327–1340. Alzheimer’s disease recapitulates development and contributes to
[26] P. LoPresti, S. Szuchet, S.C. Papasozomenos, R.P. Zinkowski, L.I. reducedmicrotubulebinding,Neuron10(1993)1–20.
Binder, Functional implications for the microtubule-associated [45] J.H. Lee, M. Goedert, W.D. Hill, V.M.-Y. Lee, J.Q. Trojanowski,
proteintau:localizationinoligodendrocytes,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. Tau Protein are abnormal expressed in olfactory epithelium of
U.S.A.92(1995)10369–10373. Alzheimer’s disease and developmentally regulated in human fetal
[27] L.I.Binder,A.Frankfurter,L.I.Rebhun,Thedistributionoftauin spinal cord, Exp. Neurol. 121 (1993) 93–105.
the mammalian central nervous system, J. Cell Biol. 101 (1985) [46] B.M.Riederer,L.I.Binder,Differentialdistributionoftauproteinsin
1371–1378. developingcatcerebellum,BrainRes.Bull.33(1994)155–161.
[28] A. Caceres, K.S. Kosik, Inhibition of neurite polarity by tau [47] U.Preuss,F.Dori

Chunk 42:
fetal
[27] L.I.Binder,A.Frankfurter,L.I.Rebhun,Thedistributionoftauin spinal cord, Exp. Neurol. 121 (1993) 93–105.
the mammalian central nervous system, J. Cell Biol. 101 (1985) [46] B.M.Riederer,L.I.Binder,Differentialdistributionoftauproteinsin
1371–1378. developingcatcerebellum,BrainRes.Bull.33(1994)155–161.
[28] A. Caceres, K.S. Kosik, Inhibition of neurite polarity by tau [47] U.Preuss,F.Doring,S.Illenberger,E.-M.Mandelkow,Cellcycle-
antisense oligonucleotides in primary cerebellar neurons, Nature dependent phosphorylation and microtubule binding of tau protein
343(1990)461–463. stablytransfectedintoChinesehamsterovarycells,Mol.Biol.Cell6
[29] A. Caceres, S. Potrebic, K.S. Kosik, The effect of Tau antisense (1995)1397–1410.
oligonucieotidesonneuriteformationofculturedcerebellarmacro- [48] I.Vincent,M.Rosado,P.Davies,MitoticmechanismsinAlzheimer’s
neurons,J.Neurosci.11(1991)1515–1523. disease?J.CellBiol.132(1996)413–425.
[30] N.W. Kowall, K.S. Kosik, Axonal disruption and aberrant local- [49] E.K. Matsuo, R.-W. Shin, M.L. Billingsley, A. Van deVoorde, M.
ization of tau protein characterize the neuropil pathology of O’Connor, Q. Trojanowski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Biopsy-derived adult
Alzheimer’sdisease,Ann.Neurol.22(1987)639–643. human brain tau is phosphorylated at many of the same sites as
[31] A.C.McKee,N.W.Kowall,K.S.Kosik,Microtubularreorganization Alzheimer’s Diseasepaired helicalfilamenttau, Neuron13 (1994)
and dendritic growth response in Alzheimer’s disease Ann, 989–1002.
Neurology26(1989)652–659. [50] W.Gordon-Krajcer,L. Yang,H.Ksiezak-Reding,Conformation of
[32] G.T. Bramblett, J.Q. Trojanowski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Regions with pairedhelicalfilamentsblocksdephosphorylationofepitopesshared
abundant neurofibrillary pathology in human brain exhibit a withfetaltauexceptSer199/202andSer202/Thr205,BrainRes.856
selective reduction in levels of binding-competent tau and (2000)163–175.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 237
[51] M.Goe

Chunk 43:
ramblett, J.Q. Trojanowski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Regions with pairedhelicalfilamentsblocksdephosphorylationofepitopesshared
abundant neurofibrillary pathology in human brain exhibit a withfetaltauexceptSer199/202andSer202/Thr205,BrainRes.856
selective reduction in levels of binding-competent tau and (2000)163–175.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 237
[51] M.Goedert,S.Satumtira,R.Jakes,M.J.Smith,C.Kamibayashi,et [70] S.M. Dudek, G.V. Johnson, Transglutaminase catalyzes the for-
al.,Reducedbindingofproteinphosphatase2Atotauproteinwith mation of sodium dodecyl sulfate-insoluble. Alz-50-reactive poly-
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome mersoftau,J.Neurochem.61(1993)1159–1162.
17 mutations, J. Neurochem. 75 (2000) 2155–2162. [71] G.V. Johnson, T.M. Cox, J.P. Lockhart, M.D. Zinnerman, M.L.
[52] T. Hagestedt, B. Lichtenberg, H. Wille, E.-M. Mandelkow, E. Miller, R.E. Powers, Transglutaminase activity is increased in
Mandelkow, Tau protein becomes long and stiff upon phosphor- Alzheimer’sdiseasebrain,BrainRes.751(1997)323–329.
ylation:Correlationbetweenparacrystallinestructureanddegreeof [72] A.Harada,K.Oguchi,S.Okabe,J.Kuno,S.Terada,etal.,Altered
phosphorylation,J.CellBiol.109(1989)1643–1651. microtubuleorganizationinsmall-calibreaxonsofmicelackingtau
[53] N.Gustke,B.Steiner,E.-M.Mandelkow,J.Biernat,H.E.Meyer,M. protein,Nature369(1994)488–491.
Goedert,E.Mandelkow,TheAlzheimer-likephosphorylationoftau [73] G.F.Hall,J.Yao,G.Lee,Humantaubecomesphosphorylatedand
proteinreducesmicrotubulebindingandinvolvesSer–ProandThr– formsfilamentous deposits when overexpressed in lamprey central
Promotifs,FEBSLett.307(1992)199–205. neuronsinsitu,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.94(1997)4733–4738.
[54] M. Mercken, F. Grynspan, R.A. Nixon, Differential sensitivity to [74] G.F. Hall, B. Chu, G. Lee, J. Yao, Human tau filaments induce
proteolysisbybraincalpainofadulthumantau,fetalhumantauand microtubuleandsynapselossinaninvitromodelofneuro

Chunk 44:
rmsfilamentous deposits when overexpressed in lamprey central
Promotifs,FEBSLett.307(1992)199–205. neuronsinsitu,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.94(1997)4733–4738.
[54] M. Mercken, F. Grynspan, R.A. Nixon, Differential sensitivity to [74] G.F. Hall, B. Chu, G. Lee, J. Yao, Human tau filaments induce
proteolysisbybraincalpainofadulthumantau,fetalhumantauand microtubuleandsynapselossinaninvitromodelofneurofibrillary
PHF-tau,FEBSLett.368(1995)10–14. degenerativedisease,J.CellSci.113(2000)1373–1387.
[55] S.Yen,C.Easson,P.Nacharaju,M.Hutton,S.H.Yen,FTDP-7tau [75] K. Spittaels, C. Van den Haute, J. Van Dorpe, K. Bruynseels, K.
mutations decrease the susceptibility of tau to calpain I digestion, Vandezande, I.Laenen,H.Geerts,etal.,Prominentaxonopathyin
FEBSLett.461(1999)91–95. the brain and spinal cord of transgenic mice overexpressing four-
[56] G.Lee,S.T.Newman,D.L.Gard,H.Band,G.Panchamoorthy,Tau repeathumantauprotein,Am.J.Pathol.155(1999)2153–2165.
interacts with src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases, J. Cell Sci. [76] V.Vogelsberg-Ragaglia,J.Bruce,C.Richter-Lansberg,B.Zhang,M.
111(1998)3167–3177. Hong, et al., Distinct FTDP-17 missense mutations in tau produce
[57] T.Maas,J.Eidenmuller,R.Brandt,Interactionoftauwiththeneural tauaggregatesandotherpathologicalphenotypesintransfectedCHO
membrane cortex is regulated by phosphorylation at sites that are cells,Mol.Biol.Cell.11(2000)4093–4104.
modified in paired helical filaments, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) [77] T.Ishihara,B.Zhang,M.Higuchi,Y.Yoshiyama,J.Q.Trojanowski,
15733–15740. V.M.-Y.Lee,Age-dependentinductionofcongophilicneurofibrillary
[58] G.Lee,R.Thangavel,V.M.Sharma,J.M.Litersky,K.Bhaskar,S.M. tau inclusions in tau transgenic mice, Am. J. Pathol. 158 (2001)
Fang,L.H.Do,A.Andreadis,G.VanHoesen,H.Ksiezak-Reding, 555–562.
Phosphorylationoftaubyfyn:implicationsforAlzheimer’sdisease, [78] L.Baum,R.Seger,J.R.Woodgett,S.Kawabata,K.Maruyama,M.
J.Neurosci.24(2004)2304–2312. Koyama,J.Silver,T.Saitoh,Overexpressedtauproteininculture

Chunk 45:
ary
[58] G.Lee,R.Thangavel,V.M.Sharma,J.M.Litersky,K.Bhaskar,S.M. tau inclusions in tau transgenic mice, Am. J. Pathol. 158 (2001)
Fang,L.H.Do,A.Andreadis,G.VanHoesen,H.Ksiezak-Reding, 555–562.
Phosphorylationoftaubyfyn:implicationsforAlzheimer’sdisease, [78] L.Baum,R.Seger,J.R.Woodgett,S.Kawabata,K.Maruyama,M.
J.Neurosci.24(2004)2304–2312. Koyama,J.Silver,T.Saitoh,Overexpressedtauproteinincultured
[59] A.C. Alonso, T. Zaidi, M. Novak, I. Grundke-Iqbal, K. Iqbal, cells is phosphorylated without formation of PHF: implication of
Hyperphosphorylation induces self-assembly of tau into tangles of phosphoprotein phosphatase involvement, Brain Res. Mol. Brain
pairedhelicalfilamentsandstraightfilaments,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. Res.34(1995)1–17.
U.S.A.98(2001)6923–6928. [79] J.Gftz,A.Probst,M.G.Spillatini,T.Sch7fer,R.Jakes,K.Bqrki,M.
[60] D.H.Geschwind,Tauphosphorylation,tangles,andneurodegenera- Goedert,Somatodendritic localizationandhyperphosphorylationof
tion:thechickenortheegg?Neuron40(2003)457–460. tauproteinintransgenicmiceexpressingthelongesthumanbraintau
[61] R.A.Crowther,O.F.Olesen,R.Jakes,M.Goedert,Themicrotubule isoform,EMBOJ.14(1995)1304–1313.
bindingrepeatsoftauproteinassembleintofilamentslikethosefound [80] J.P. Brion, G. Tremp, J.N. Octave, Transgenic expression of the
inAlzheimer’sdisease,FEBSLett.309(1992)199–202. shortest human tau affects its compartmentalization and its phos-
[62] A. Abraha, N. Ghoshal, T.C. Gamblin, V. Cryns, R.W. Berry, J. phorylationasinthepretanglestageofAlzheimer’sdisease,Am.J.
Kuret,L.I.Binder,C-terminalinhibitionoftauassemblyinvitroand Pathol.54(1999)255–270.
inAlzheimer’sdisease,J.CellSci.113(2000)3737–3745. [81] V.Zhukareva,V.Vogelsberg-Ragaglia,V.M.VanDeerlin,J.Bruce,
[63] T.T.Rohn,R.A.Rissman,M.C.Davis,Y.-E.Kim,C.W.Cotman,E. T. Shuck, M. Grossman, et al., Loss of brain tau defines novel
Head, Caspase-9 Activation and caspase cleavage of tau in the sporadic and familial tauopathies with frontotemporal dementia,
Alzheimer’sdiseasebrai

Chunk 46:
4(1999)255–270.
inAlzheimer’sdisease,J.CellSci.113(2000)3737–3745. [81] V.Zhukareva,V.Vogelsberg-Ragaglia,V.M.VanDeerlin,J.Bruce,
[63] T.T.Rohn,R.A.Rissman,M.C.Davis,Y.-E.Kim,C.W.Cotman,E. T. Shuck, M. Grossman, et al., Loss of brain tau defines novel
Head, Caspase-9 Activation and caspase cleavage of tau in the sporadic and familial tauopathies with frontotemporal dementia,
Alzheimer’sdiseasebrain,Neurobiol.Dis.11(2002)341–354. Ann.Neurol.49(2001)165–175.
[64] T.C.Gamblin,F.Chen,A.Zambrano,A.Abraha,S.Lagalwar,A.L. [82] H. Aizawa, H. Kawasaki, H. Murofushi, S. Kotani, K. Suzuki, H.
Guillozet, et al., Caspase cleavage of tau: linking amyloid and Sakai, A common amino acid sequence in 190-kDa microtubule-
neurofibrillarytanglesinAlzheimer’sdisease,Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci. associated protein and tau for the promotion of microtubule
U.S.A.100(2003)10032–10037. assembly,J.Biol.Chem.264(1989)5885–5890.
[65] G. Amadoro, A.L. Serafino, C. Barbato, M.T. Ciotti, A. Sacco, P. [83] R.Brandt,G.Lee,Functionalorganizationofmicrotubule-associated
Calissano,N.Canu,RoleofN-terminaltaudomainintegrityonthe protein tau. Identification of regions which affect microtubule
survivalofcerebellargranuleneurons,CellDeathDiffer.11(2004) growth, nucleation, and bundle formation in vitro, J. Biol. Chem.
217–230. 268(1993)3414–3419.
[66] G.Carmel,E.M.Mager,L.I.Binder,J.Kuret,Thestructuralbasisof [84] N. Gustke, B. Trinczek, J. Biernat, E.-M. Mandelkow, E. Man-
monoclonal antibody Alz50’s selectivity for Alzheimer’s disease delkow,Domainsoftauproteinandinteractionswithmicrotubules,
pathology,J.Biol.Chem.271(1996)32789–32795. Biochemistry33(1994)9511–9522.
[67] M. Morishima-Kawashima, M. Hasegawa, K. Takio, M. Suzuki, [85] H.Wille,G.Drewes,J.Biernat,E.-M.Mandelkow,E.Mandelkow,
K. Titani, Y. Ihara, Ubiquitin is conjugated with amino-terminally Alzheimer-like paired helical filaments and antiparallel dimers
processed tau in paired helical filaments, Neuron 10 (1993) formed from microtubule-associated prote

Chunk 47:
6)32789–32795. Biochemistry33(1994)9511–9522.
[67] M. Morishima-Kawashima, M. Hasegawa, K. Takio, M. Suzuki, [85] H.Wille,G.Drewes,J.Biernat,E.-M.Mandelkow,E.Mandelkow,
K. Titani, Y. Ihara, Ubiquitin is conjugated with amino-terminally Alzheimer-like paired helical filaments and antiparallel dimers
processed tau in paired helical filaments, Neuron 10 (1993) formed from microtubule-associated protein tau in vitro, J. Cell
1151–1160. Biol.118(1992)573–584.
[68] S. Yan, X. Chen, A.-M. Schmidt, J. Brett, G. Godman, et al., [86] R.A. Crowther, O.F. Olesen, M.J. Smith, R. Jakes, M. Goedert,
Glycated tau protein in Alzheimer disease: a mechanism for AssemblyofAlzheimer-like filaments fromfull-length tau protein,
induction of oxidant stress, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91 FEBSLett.337(1994)135–138.
(1994)7787–7791. [87] M.Goedert,R.Jakes,M.G.Spillantini,M.Hasegawa,M.J.Smith,
[69] T.Horiguchi,K.Uryu,B.I.Giasson,H.Ischiropoulos,R.LightFoot, R.A.Crowther,Assemblyofmicrotubule-associatedproteintauinto
et al., Nitration of tau protein is linked to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer-like filaments induced by sulfated glycosaminoglycans,
tauopathies,Am.J.Pathol.163(2003)1021–1031. Nature383(1996)550–553.

---PAGE BREAK---

238 G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239
[88] M. Perez, J.M. Valpuesta, M. Medina, E.M. Degarcini, J. Avila, [107] S. Arawaka, M. Usami, N. Sahara, G.D. Schellenberg, G. Lee, H.
Polymerizationoftauintofilamentsinthepresenceofheparin:the Mori,Thetaumutationval337metdisruptscytoskeletalnetworksof
minimalsequencerequiredfortau–tauinteraction,J.Neurochem.67 microtubules,NeuroReport10(1999)993–997.
(1996)1183–1190. [108] M.DeTure,L.Ko,S.Yen,P.Nacharaju,C.Easson,etal.,Missense
[89] M.Hasegawa,R.A.Crowther,R.Jakes,M.Goedert,Alzheimer-like tau mutations identified in FTDP-17 have a small effect on tau-
changes in microtubule-associated protein Tau induced by sulfated microtubuleinteractions,BrainRes.853(2000)5–14.
glycosaminoglycans.Inhibitionofmic

Chunk 48:
em.67 microtubules,NeuroReport10(1999)993–997.
(1996)1183–1190. [108] M.DeTure,L.Ko,S.Yen,P.Nacharaju,C.Easson,etal.,Missense
[89] M.Hasegawa,R.A.Crowther,R.Jakes,M.Goedert,Alzheimer-like tau mutations identified in FTDP-17 have a small effect on tau-
changes in microtubule-associated protein Tau induced by sulfated microtubuleinteractions,BrainRes.853(2000)5–14.
glycosaminoglycans.Inhibitionofmicrotubulebinding,stimulation [109] N.Sahara,T.Tomiyama,H.Mori,Missensepointmutationsoftauto
ofphosphorylation,andfilamentassemblydependonthedegreeof segregatewithFTDP-17exhibitsite-specificeffectsonmicrotubule
sulfation,J.Biol.Chem.272(1997)33118–33124. structure in COS cells: a novel action of R406W mutation, J.
[90] D.M.Wilson,L.I.Binder,Polymerizationofmicrotubule-associated Neurosci.Res.60(2000)380–387.
proteintauundernear-physiologicalconditions,J.Biol.Chem.270 [110] P.K. Krishnamurthy, G.V. Johnson, Mutant (R406W)human tau is
(1995)24306–24314. hyperphosphorylatedanddoesnotefficientlybindmicrotubulesina
[91] D.M. Wilson, L.I. Binder, Free fatty acids stimulate the polymer- neuronalcorticalcellmodel,J.Biol.Chem.279(2004)7893–7900.
ization of tau and amyloid beta peptides. In vitro evidence for a [111] J.Leger,M.Kempf,G.Lee,G.R.Brandt,Conversionofserineto
common effector of pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease, Am. J. aspartate imitates phosphorylation-induced changes in the structure
Pathol.150(1997)2181–2195. and function of microtubule-associated protein tau, J. Biol. Chem.
[92] T. Kampers, P. Friedhoff, J. Biernat, E.-M. Mandelkow, E. 272(1997)8441–8446.
Mandelkow,RNAstimulatesaggregationofmicrotubule-associated [112] T. Fath, J. Eidenmuller, T. Maas, R. Brandt, Herpes simplex virus
proteintauintoAlzheimer-likepairedhelicalfilaments,FEBSLett. mediated expression of the axonal protein tau in human model
399(1996)344–349. neurons(NT2-Ncells),Microsc.Res.Tech.48(2000)85–96.
[93] M. Goedert, R. Jakes, R.A. Crowther, Effects of frontotemporal [113] A. Ebneth, R. Godemann, 

Chunk 49:
esaggregationofmicrotubule-associated [112] T. Fath, J. Eidenmuller, T. Maas, R. Brandt, Herpes simplex virus
proteintauintoAlzheimer-likepairedhelicalfilaments,FEBSLett. mediated expression of the axonal protein tau in human model
399(1996)344–349. neurons(NT2-Ncells),Microsc.Res.Tech.48(2000)85–96.
[93] M. Goedert, R. Jakes, R.A. Crowther, Effects of frontotemporal [113] A. Ebneth, R. Godemann, K. Stamer, S. Illenberger, B. Trinczek,
dementia FTDP-17 mutations on heparin-induced assembly of tau E.-M. Mandelkow, E. Mandelkow, Overexpression of tau protein
filaments,FEBSLett.450(1999)306–311. inhibitskinesin-dependenttraffickingofvesicles,mitochondria,and
[94] P. Nacharaju, J. Lewis, C. Easson, S. Yen, J. Hackett, et al., endoplasmicreticulum:implicationsforAlzheimer’sdisease,J.Cell
AcceleratedfilamentformationfromtauproteinwithspecificFTDP- Biol. 143 (1998) 777–794.
17missensemutations,FEBSLett.447(1999)195–199. [114] S.J. Pleasure, C. Page, V.M.-Y. Lee, Pure, postmitotic, polarized
[95] M. Hasegawa, M. Smith, M. Goedert, Tau proteins with FTDP-17 human neurons derived from NTera 2 cells provide a system for
mutationshaveareducedabilitytopromotemicrotubuleassembly, expressingexogenousproteinsinterminallydifferentiatedneurons,
FEBSLett.437(1998)207–210. J.Neurosci.12(1992)1802–1815.
[96] C. Chirita, J. Kuret, Evidence for an intermediate in tau filament [115] S.E. Merrick,J.Q.Trojanowski,V.M.-Y. Lee, Selectivedestruction
formation,Biochemistry43(2004)1704–1714. of stable microtubules and axons by inhibitors of protein serine/
[97] C. Chirita, M. Necula, J. Kuret, Ligand-dependent inhibition and threoninephosphatasesinculturedhumanneurons,J.Neurosci.17
reversal of tau filament formation, Biochemistry 43 (2004) (1997)5726–5737.
2879–2887. [116] M.Perez,F.Hernandez,A.Gomez-Ramos, M.Smith,G.Perry,J.
[98] P. Delobel, S. Flament, M. Hamdane, R. Jakes, A. Rousseau, A. Avila,Formationofaberrantphosphotaufibrillarpolymersinneural
Delacourte,J.P.Vilain,M.Goedert,L.Buee,Functi

Chunk 50:
endent inhibition and threoninephosphatasesinculturedhumanneurons,J.Neurosci.17
reversal of tau filament formation, Biochemistry 43 (2004) (1997)5726–5737.
2879–2887. [116] M.Perez,F.Hernandez,A.Gomez-Ramos, M.Smith,G.Perry,J.
[98] P. Delobel, S. Flament, M. Hamdane, R. Jakes, A. Rousseau, A. Avila,Formationofaberrantphosphotaufibrillarpolymersinneural
Delacourte,J.P.Vilain,M.Goedert,L.Buee,Functionalcharacter- culturedcells,FEBSLett.269(2002)1484–1489.
ization of FTDP-17 tau gene mutations through their effects on [117] M.DeTure,L.Ko,C.Easson,S.H.Yen,Tauassemblyininducible
Xenopusoocytematuration,J.Biol.Chem.277(2002)9199–9205. transfectants expressing wild-type or FTDP-17 tau, Am. J. Pathol.
[99] J. Knops, K.S. Kosik, G. Lee, J.D. Pardee, L. Cohen-Gould, L. 161(2002)1711–1722.
McConlogue, Overexpression of tau in a nonneuronal cell induces [118] L.Ko,M.DeTure,N.Sahara,R.Chihab,S.H.Yen,Cellularmodels
longcellularprocesses,J.CellBiol.114(1991)725–733. fortaufilamentassembly,J.Mol.Neurosci.19(2002)311–316.
[100] T. Frappier, N.S. Liang, K. Brown, C.L. Leung, T. Lynch, et al., [119] Y. Kanai, N. Hirokawa, Sorting mechanisms of tau and MAP2 in
Abnormal microtubule packing in processes of SF9 cells express- neurons: suppressed axonal transit of MAP2 and locally regulated
ing the FTDP-17 V337M tau mutation, FEBS Lett. 455 (1999) microtubulebinding,Neuron14(1995)421–432.
262–266. [120] H.N.Dawson,A.Ferreira,M.V.Eyster,N.Ghosha,L.I.Binder,M.P.
[101] Y. Kanai, R. Takemura, T. Oshima, H. Mori, Y. Ihara, M. Vitek, Inhibition of neuronal maturation in primary hippocampal
Yanagisawa, T. Masaki, N. Hirokawa, Expression of multiple tau neuronsfromtaudeficientmice,J.CellSci.114(2001)1179–1187.
isoformsandmicrotubulebundleformationinfibroblaststransfected [121] M.Rapoport,H.N.Dawson,L.I.Binder,M.P.Vitek,A.Ferreira,Tau
withasingletaucDNA,J.CellBiol.109(1989)1173–1184. isessentialtobeta-amyloid-inducedneurotoxicity,Proc.Natl.Acad.
[102] E. Montejo de Garcini, S. de la Luna, J.E. Domy

Chunk 51:
. Masaki, N. Hirokawa, Expression of multiple tau neuronsfromtaudeficientmice,J.CellSci.114(2001)1179–1187.
isoformsandmicrotubulebundleformationinfibroblaststransfected [121] M.Rapoport,H.N.Dawson,L.I.Binder,M.P.Vitek,A.Ferreira,Tau
withasingletaucDNA,J.CellBiol.109(1989)1173–1184. isessentialtobeta-amyloid-inducedneurotoxicity,Proc.Natl.Acad.
[102] E. Montejo de Garcini, S. de la Luna, J.E. Domy´nguez, J. Avila, Sci.U.S.A.99(2002)6364–6369.
Overexpression of tau protein in COS-1 cells results in the [122] A. Ferrari, F. Hoerndli, T. Baechi, R.M. Nitsch, J. Gftz, beta-
stabilization of centrosome-independent microtubules and exten- Amyloidinducespairedhelicalfilament-liketaufilamentsintissue
sion of cytoplasmic processes, Mol. Cell. Biochem. 130 (1994) culture,J.Biol.Chem.278(2003)40162–40168.
187–196. [123] Y.Liu,B.T.Himes,J.Moul,J.W.Huang,S.Y.Chow,A.Tessler,I.
[103] Y. Kanai, J. Chen, N. Hirokawa, Microtubule bundling by tau Fischer, Application of recombinant adenovirus for in vitro gene
proteinsinvitro:analysisoffunctionaldomains,EMBOJ.11(1992) deliverytospinalcord,BrainRes.768(1997)19–29.
3953–3961. [124] B.G.Szaro,P.Grant,V.M.-Y.Lee,H.Gainer,Inhibitionofaxonal
[104] G. Lee, S.L. Rook, Expression of tau protein in non-neuronal development after injection of neurofilament antibodies into a
cells: microtubule binding and stabilization, J. Cell Sci. 102 Xenopuslaevis embryo,J.Comp.Neurol.308(1991)576–585.
(1992) 227–237. [125] G.F. Hall, B. Chu, V.M.-Y. Lee, J. Yao, Hyperphosphorylation of
[105] J. Leger, R. Brandt, G. Lee, Identification of tau protein regions humantauiscorrelatedwithprogressivestagesofcytodegeneration
requiredforprocessformationinPC12cells,J.CellSci.107(1994) inaninvitromodelofneurofibrillarydegenerativedisease,Am.J.
3403–3412. Pathol.158(2001)235–246.
[106] R.Dayanandan,M.vanSlegtenhorst,T.G.Mack,L.Ko,S.H.Yen,et [126] G.F. Hall, S. Lee, J. Yao, Neurofibrillary degeneration can be
al., Mutations in tau reduce its microtubule binding properties 

Chunk 52:
scorrelatedwithprogressivestagesofcytodegeneration
requiredforprocessformationinPC12cells,J.CellSci.107(1994) inaninvitromodelofneurofibrillarydegenerativedisease,Am.J.
3403–3412. Pathol.158(2001)235–246.
[106] R.Dayanandan,M.vanSlegtenhorst,T.G.Mack,L.Ko,S.H.Yen,et [126] G.F. Hall, S. Lee, J. Yao, Neurofibrillary degeneration can be
al., Mutations in tau reduce its microtubule binding properties in arrested in an in vitro cellular model of human tauopathy by
intact cells and affect its phosphorylation, FEBS Lett. 446 (1999) applicationofacompoundwhichinhibitstaufilamentformationin
228–232. vitro,J.Mol.Neurosci.19(2002)253–260.

---PAGE BREAK---

G.F.Hall,J.Yao/BiochimicaetBiophysicaActa1739(2005)224–239 239
[127] H.Braak,E.Braak,NeuropathologicalstagingofAlzheimer-related phenotype in tau transgenic mouse lacking neurofilaments, J.
changes,ActaNeuropathol.82(1991)239–259. Neurosci.21(2001)6026–6035.
[128] R.L.Klein,W.L.Lin,D.W.Dickson,J.Lewis,M.HuttonM,etal., [134] H.G.Tomasiewicz,D.B.Flaherty,J.P.Soria,J.G.Wood,Transgenic
Rapidneurofibrillarytangleformationafterlocalizedgenetransferof zebrafish modelofneurodegeneration, J.Neurosci. Res.70 (2002)
mutatedtau,Am.J.Pathol.164(2004)347–353. 734–745.
[129] B.C. Kraemer, B. Zhang, J.B. Leverenz, J.H. Thomas, J.Q. Troja- [135] T. Ishihara, M. Hong, B. Zhang, Y. Nakagawa, M.K. Lee, J.Q.
nowski,G.D.Schellenberg,Neurodegenerationanddefectiveneuro- Trojanowski,V.M.-Y. Lee,Age-dependent emergence andprogres-
transmissioninaCaenorhabditiselegansmodeloftauopathy,Proc. sion of a tauopathy in transgenic mice overexpressing the shortest
Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.100(2003)9980–9985. humantauisoform,Neuron24(1999)751–762.
[130] C.W. Wittmann, M.F. Wszolek, J.M. Shulman, P.M. Salvaterra, J. [136] J.Lewis,E.McGowan,J.Rockwood,H.Melrose,P.Nacharaju,M.
Lewis, M. Hutton, M.B. Feany, Tauopathy in Drosophila: neuro- Van Slegtenhorst, et al., Neurofibrillary tangles, amyotrophy and
degeneration without neurofibrillary tangles, Science 293 (2001) p

Chunk 53:
tl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A.100(2003)9980–9985. humantauisoform,Neuron24(1999)751–762.
[130] C.W. Wittmann, M.F. Wszolek, J.M. Shulman, P.M. Salvaterra, J. [136] J.Lewis,E.McGowan,J.Rockwood,H.Melrose,P.Nacharaju,M.
Lewis, M. Hutton, M.B. Feany, Tauopathy in Drosophila: neuro- Van Slegtenhorst, et al., Neurofibrillary tangles, amyotrophy and
degeneration without neurofibrillary tangles, Science 293 (2001) progressive motor disturbance in mice expressing mutant (P301L)
711–714. tauprotein,Nat.Genet.25(2000)402–405.
[131] J.M. Shulman, M.B. Feany, Genetic modifiers of tauopathy in [137] J. Gftz, F. Chen, J. van Dorpe, R.M. Nitsch, Formation of
Drosophila,Genetics165(2003)1233–1242. neurofibrillary tangles in P301l tau transgenic mice induced by
[132] J.Wang,Y.C.Tung,Y.Wang,X.T.Li,K.Iqbal,I.Grundke-Iqbal, Abeta42fibrils,Science293(2001)1491–1495.
Hyperphosphorylationandaccumulationofneurofilamentproteinsin [138] G.F. Hall, K.S. Kosik, Axotomy-induced neurofilament phos-
Alzheimer disease brain and in okadaic acid-treated SY5Y cells, phorylation is inhibited in situ by microinjection of PKA and
FEBSLett.507(2001)81–87. PKC inhibitors into identified lamprey neurons, Neuron 10 (1993)
[133] T. Ishihara, M. Higuchi, B. Zhang, Y. Yoshiyama, M. Hong, J.Q. 613–625.
Trojanowski, V.M.-Y. Lee, Attenuated neurodegenerative disease

---PAGE BREAK---



